1. October 3,  2014


My Dear Countryme
Today is the holy festival of Vijay Dashami. My heartiest greetings on this occasion of Vijay Dashami to one and all.
Through the medium of radio, I would like to share few heartfelt thoughts with you today. And, I hope that not only today, this series of conversation may be carried out regularly in future. I will try my best, if possible, to take out time twice a month or even once to speak with you. In future, I have also decided that whenever I will speak to you, it would be on Sundays and time would be morning 11. In that way, it would be convenient for you too and I will feel contented with the fact that I am successful in sharing my thoughts with you.
We are celebrating the festival of Vijay Dashami today, which symbolises the triumph of Good over Evil. But one gentleman named Ganesh Venkatadari, a native of Mumbai, sent me a mail and has written to me that we must take a vow to eliminate ten bad habits from within ourselves on this occasion of Vijay Dashami. I express my gratitude to him for this recommendation. We all, as individuals, must be thinking to put an end to all our bad habits and win over them, although, with respect to our nation, I believe we all should come together and take a vow in eliminating all the dirt from our country. On this occasion of Vijay Dashami, we must take a vow to eliminate dirt and filth and we can do so on this occasion.
Yesterday, on 2nd October on the eve of Mahatma Gandhi’s birth anniversary, more than 1.25 crore countrymen have started the ‘Swachh Bharat’ movement. I had shared one thought yesterday which is that I will nominate nine people and they need to upload their videos of cleaning the nation on social media websites, and nominating nine more people to do the same. I want you all to join me, clean the nation, and nominate nine more people to clean the nation, and those nine people must do the same. Eventually, the entire nation will have this atmosphere. I strongly believe that you all will join hands with me to carry this movement forward.
Whenever, we think of Mahatma Gandhi, naturally we are reminded of Khaadi. You may be wearing variety of clothes with different fabrics and company brands in your family. But is it not possible to include Khaadi too? I am not telling you to use only Khaadi products. I am just insisting to use, at least one Khaadi product, like handkerchief, or a bath towel, a bed sheet, a pillow cover, a curtain or anything of that kind. If you have an inclination for all kinds of fabrics and clothes in your family, you can also buy Khaadi products on a regular basis. I am saying this as when you buy Khaadi products, it helps poor people to light lamps on Diwali. Also, you can avail a special discount on Khaadi products from 2nd October for a month. It is a very small thing, but has very big impact which binds you with the poor. How you see this as a success. When I speak of 1.25 crore countrymen and infer the outcome, we might assume that government will take care of everything and as individuals we stand nowhere. We have seen that if we intend to progress then we need to identify our potential, understand our strengths and I can swear that we form the incomparable souls of this world. You all know that our own scientists have been successful in reaching Mars, bearing least expenses. We do not lack in our strengths, but have forgotten our strong points. We have forgotten ourselves. We have become hopeless. My dear Brothers and Sisters I cannot let this happen. I always remember one of the sayings by Swami Vivekananda ji as he always used to emphasize on one thought and possibly, he might have shared this thought with many others.
Vivekananda ii used to say, once a lioness was carrying her two cubs on the way and came upon a flock of sheep from a distance. She got a desire to prey upon them and started running towards the flock. Seeing her running, one of the cub too, joined her. The other cub was left behind and the lioness moved on, post preying upon the flock. One of the cub went with the lioness but the other cub was left behind, and was brought up by a mother sheep. He grew among the sheep, started speaking their language and adapted their ways of life. He used to sit, laugh and enjoy with them. The cub who went with the lioness, was a grown-up now. Once, he happened to meet his brother and was shocked to see him. He thought in his mind,” He is a lion and is playing with sheep, talking like sheep. What is wrong with him? He felt that his ego was at stake and went to talk to his brother. He said,” What are you doing, brother? You are a lion.” He gets a reply from his brother, “No, I am a sheep. I grew up with them. They have brought me up. Listen to my voice and the way I talk.” He said, “Come, I will show you, who you really are.” He took his brother to a well and told him to look in the water his own reflection, and asked him, if both of them had similar faces. “I am a lion, you, too, are a lion.” His brother’s self-esteem got awakened; he attained self-realization through this and even a lion brought up among sheep started roaring like a lion. His inner entity was awakened. Swami Vivekananda ji used to say the same. My countrymen, 125 crore Indians have indefinite strengths and capabilities. We need to understand ourselves. We need to identify our inner strengths and like Swami ji always used to say, we need to carry our self-respect, identify ourselves and move forward in life and be successful, which in turn, make our nation a winning and successful country. I believe, all our countrymen with a population of 125 crores are efficient, strong and can stand against any odds with confidence.
These days, I have been getting many letters through social media websites, like Facebook, from my friends. One of them, Mr. Gautam Pal, has addressed an issue regarding the specially-abled children. He has suggested forming separate Municipality, Municipal Corporation or councils for them. We need to plan something for them for enhancing their moral support. I liked his suggestion and I have experienced this during my day as Chief Minister of Gujarat. A Special Olympics was held in Athens in 2011. After the Olympics I had called all the participants and winners of specially-abled category from Gujarat to my home. I spent two hours with them, and it was the most emotional and inspiring incident of my life. As I believe, a specially-abled child is not only the responsibility of the parents in a family, it is the responsibility of the entire society. God has chosen this family to support a specially-abled child, but a child is a responsibility of the entire nation. After this incident, I got so emotionally attached with them, I started organizing separate Olympics for them in Gujarat. Thousands of children with their parents used to come and attend, I, too, used to attend the Olympics. There was an atmosphere of trust and, this is the reason, I liked the suggestion given by Mr. Gautam Pal and I felt like sharing this thought with you.
It reminds me of another story. Once, a traveller was sitting at the corner of a road, and was asking everyone the way to a specific place. He continued asking the route from many people. A man, sitting beside him was observing him. The traveller stood up and started asking passers-by again. He stood up and said,” The way to your destination is here.” The traveller, then, said,” Brother, you were sitting next to me for so long, saw me asking everyone the route. If you knew the route, why didn’t you tell me before?” The man answered,” I was waiting to verify if you really intend to reach your destination or you are asking people just for your knowledge. But, when you stood up, I was assured that you truly wish to reach your destination, and decided to confirm the address”.
My countrymen, till the time we do not decide to walk, stand on our own, we will also not the get the guidance from others in our journey. We will not get the people to hold our hand and help us in walking. We need to take the initiative in walking and I trust all my 125 crore Indians, who are capable of walking on their own and will keep moving.
For the past few days, I have been getting very interesting suggestions from people. I am aware, when to adapt to these suggestions. But, I want everyone to actively participate in these suggestions as we all belong to our nation, the nation does not only belong to any Government. We are the citizens of our Nation and we all need to unite without any exceptions. Some of you have suggested simplifying the registration process for Small Scale Industries. I will definitely put this under Government’s notice. Some of you have written to me to incorporate skills development courses in the school curriculum from 5th standard. This will help the students to learn various skills and crafts. I loved this effective suggestion given by them. They have also suggested that even the adults should learn skills development courses along with their studies. One of the suggestions given was to keep a dustbin at every 100 meters and a cleaning system should be established.
Some of you have written to me, to abolish the use of plastic bags. I am receiving numerous suggestions from people. I have always been telling you, to write to me and narrate a true incident, which is positive and inspiring to me and our Countrymen, along with the evidence. If you do this, I can promise this to you, that I will share all those heartfelt thoughts or suggestions with all our Countrymen, through “Mann ki Baat”.
I have only one intention in speaking with you all,” Come, let us serve our Mother India. Let us all take our nation to the new heights. Let us all take a step forward. If you take one step, our nation takes 125 crore steps to move forward, and for this purpose, on this auspicious occasion of Vijay Dashami, we all need to defeat all of our inner evils and decide to start doing something good for the nation. Today is the fortunate beginning for me. I will be sharing my heartfelt thoughts with one and all. Today, I have shared all the thoughts coming directly from my heart. I will meet you all next at 11 am on Sundays, but I trust our journey shall never end and will continue receiving love and suggestions from you.
After listening to my thoughts, please do not hesitate in sharing your thoughts or advice to me, I will appreciate that your suggestions keep coming. I am glad to talk with you through this simple medium of Radio, which serves each and every corner of the nation. I can reach the poorest homes, as mine, my nation’s strength lies within the hut of Poor, within the villages; my nation’s strength lies with the Mothers, Sisters and Youths; my nation’s strength lies with the farmers. Nation will only progress, if you believe in it. I am expressing my trust towards the nation. I believe in your strength, hence, I believe in our nation’s future.
I would once again, like to thank one and all for taking out time and listening to me. Thank you all.
2. November 2, 2014


My dear fellow countrymen,
I am with you again almost after a month. A month is quite a long time. Lots of things keep happening in the world. You all have recently celebrated the festival of Diwali with great fervour and joy. It is these festivals which bring happiness in our daily lives from time to time. Be it poor or rich, people from village or from urban areas, festivals hold a different significance in everyone’s lives. This is my first meeting after Diwali, so I convey my very warm wishes to you all.
Last time we had some general conversation. But then I came to some new realizations after that conversation. Sometimes we think leave it… nothing is going to change, people are indifferent, they will not do anything, our country is like this. From my last conversation in Mann Ki Baat to this one, I would urge you all to change this mindset. Neither is our country is like this nor our people indifferent. Sometimes I feel the Nation is way ahead and the government is lacking behind. And from my personal experience I will say that the governments too needs to change their mindsets. And I say that because I can see tremendous sense of commitment in the Indian youth. They are very eager to do their bit and are just seeking an opportunity where they can do their bit. And they are making efforts at their own end. Last time I had asked them to buy at least one khadi outfit. I had not asked anyone to be Khadidhari, But the feedback I got from Khadi stores was that in a week’s time the sales had jumped up by 125%. In this way, as compared to last year the sales this year is more than double in the week following 2nd Oct. This means, the people of our country is many times more than we think of. I salute all my fellow Indians.
Cleanliness……….. Can anyone imagine that cleanliness will become a such a huge public movement. The expectations are high and they should be so. I can see some good results, cleanliness can now be witnessed in two parts. One is those huge garbage piles which keep lying in the city; well the people in the government will work to remove those. It is a big challenge but you cannot run away from your responsibilities. All state governments and all municipalities will now have to take concrete actions due to the rising public pressure. Media is playing a very positive role in this. But there is the second aspect which gives me immense pleasure, happiness and a sense of satisfaction that the general public has started feeling that leave what happened in the past, now they will not dirty their surroundings. We will not add to the existing dirt. A gentleman Mr Bharat Gupta has sent me a mail on mygov.in from Satna, Madhya Pradesh. He has related his personal experience during his tour of the railways. He said that people eat on trains and usually litter around. He continues to say that he has been touring from the past many years but it is this time around no one was littering, rather they were looking for dustbins to throw their trash. When they could not see any arrangements they collected all their litter in a corner. He says that it was a very gratifying experience for me. I thank Bharat ji for sharing this experience with me.
What I am seeing is that this campaign has had a great influence on kids. Many families mention that now whenever kids eat a chocolate they themselves pick the wrapper and disposes it. I was seeing a message on the social media. Someone had posted a picture with the Title “My hero of the Day”. This picture was that of a little kid who, picks up trash, wherever he goes, even when going to school. He is himself motivated to do this. Just see…people now feel it is their country and they will not make it dirty. We will not add to the existing dirt pile. And those do litter feel ashamed for someone is around to point it out to them. I consider all these to be good omens.
Another thing is that many people come to meet me who are from all the sections of the society. They can be government officers, from film world, sports world, industrialists, scientists ……. All of them, whenever they interact with me, in ten minutes discussion, about four to five minutes the discussion is on social issues. Someone talks about cleanliness, while some others talk about education, while someone talks about social reforms. Some people discuss the ruining of family life. I initially thought if a businessman comes, he will definitely talk of things of his personal interest. But I am seeing a major change.
They talk less about their interest and more about taking on some or the other social responsibility. When I add up all these small incidents I see a larger picture and I realize that we are moving in the right direction. It is true that unhealthy environment leads to diseases and sickness, but where does sickness strike first. It first strikes the poor household. When we work towards cleanliness, we make a major effort in the direction of helping the poor. If the poor families are saved from diseases, then they will be saved from a lot of financial problems. If a person is healthy, then he will work hard, earn for the family and help in running the family smoothly. And so this cleanliness drive is directly related to the health and welfare of my poor brethren. We may not be able to do something to help the poor, but even keeping the environs clean helps the poor in a big way. Let us view it from this perspective; it will be very beneficial.
I receive different kinds of letters. Last time I had mentioned about our specially abled children. Whom God has given some kind of deficiencies; I had expressed my feelings regarding those people. I see that people who work in this field are sending me their success stories. But I came to know about two things from my people in the government. The people from the HRD ministry after hearing my talk, felt the need to do something. And the officers came together to work out an action plan. This is an example of how changes are coming about in governance. One they have decided that those specially abled who want to pursue technical education, a thousand of them who are good will be selected for Special Scholarships, and a plan has been made. I congratulate the officials who could think in those lines. Another important decision is that all the Kendriya Vidyalaya’s and all Central Universities will have a special infrastructure for the specially abled, for example if they can’t climb stairs then there will be provision for ramps to facilitate movement by wheel chair. They need different kinds of toilets. The HRD ministry has decided to allocate an additional Lakh rupees to the Kendriya Vidyalays and Central universities. This fund will be used by these institutions to create infrastructure for the specially abled. This is an auspicious beginning……………these things will lead us to change.
I had the chance to visit Siachin a few days back. I spent Diwali with the Jawans who are ready to lay down their lives for the nation. When the nation was celebrating Diwali I was at Siachin. It is because of them that we were able to celebrate Diwali, so I wanted to be with them. I experienced the difficulties in which they spent their time there. I salute all my Jawans. But I want to share another matter of great pride with you. Our Jawans work in the field of security. In calamities, they risk their lives to save our life. They also fetch medals for us in sporting events. You will be glad to know that these Jawans have won a gold medal in a very prestigious event in Britain called Cambrian Patrol, defeating contestants from 140 nations. I offer these Jawans my heartiest congratulations.
I also got an opportunity to meet, the young and dynamic students, boys and girls over tea who had won medals in Sports. They give me renewed energy. I was seeing their zeal and enthusiasm. The facilities in our country are quite less as compared to other nations, but instead of complaining they were just sharing their joy and excitement. For me, this tea programme for these players was very inspiring, and I felt really good.
I would like to tell you something more and that too from my heart. I truly believe that people of my country trust my words and my intentions. But, today one more time, I want to reiterate my commitment. As far as black money is concerned, my people, please trust your Prime Servant, for me this is the Article of Faith. This is my commitment that the hard-earned money of the poor people stashed abroad, every penny of that should be brought back. The ways and means to be followed can be different. And this is very obvious in a democratic country, but on the basis of as much I understand and as much I know, I assure you that we are on the right track. Today, nobody, neither me, nor the government, nor you, nor even the previous government knew how much money is stashed abroad. Everyone gives estimate calculated in his/her own way. I don’t want to get lost in some such figures and estimates, Its my commitment that, be it 2 rupees, or 5 rupees, or millions or even billions, this is the hard-earned money of the poor people of my country and it has to come back. And I assure you that I will keep trying till the end. No efforts will be spared. I want your blessings to be always with me. I assure you that I will do whatever and whenever something is required to be done for you. I give my commitment to you.
I have received a letter. It has been sent by Sri Abhishek Pareekh. The same sentiments were expressed to me by many mothers and sisters when I was not even the Prime Minister. Some doctor friends had also expressed their concern and I too have expressed my views on this issue a number of times in the past. Mr. Parikh has drawn my attention towards the increase of drug addiction that is fast catching up with our young generation. He has asked me to discuss this topic in “Mann ki Baat.” I agree with his concern and I will definitely include this topic, in my next edition of Mann Ki Baat. I will discuss the topic of drugs, drug addiction and drug mafia and how they are a threat to our country’s youth. If you have some experience, any information in this regard, if you have ever rescued any child from this drug addiction, if you know of any ways and means to help, if any government official has played a good role, if you give me any such information, I will convey such efforts to the public and together we will try to create an environment in each family that no child ever thinks of choosing this vice out of sheer frustration. I will definitely discuss this in detail in the next edition.
I know I am choosing those topics which put the government in the dock. But how long will we keep these things hiding? How long will we brush these important concerns under the carpet? Some day or the other we need to take a call, follow our instincts and for grand intentions tough calls are equally important. I am mustering the courage to do so because your love inspires me to do so. And I will continue to do such things because of your love.
Some people told me “ Modi ji you asked us to send you suggestions on Facebook, twitter or email. But a large section of the social class does not have access to these facilities, so what can they do. Your point is very valid. Everyone does not have this facility. Well then, if you have something to say related to Mann Ki Baat, that you hear on the radio even in the villages then do write into me on the following address
Mann Ki Baat
Akashvani
Sansad Marg
New Delhi.
Even if you send some suggestions through letters they will definitely reach me. And I will take them seriously as active citizens are the biggest asset for development. You write one letter, it indicates that you are very active. When you give your opinion, it means that you are concerned with national issues and this is strength of the nation. I welcome you.
For my Mann Ki Baat, your mann ki baat should also reach me. Maybe you will definitely write a letter. I will try and interact with you again next month. I will try, that whenever I talk, it is Sunday, around 11 am. So I am getting closer to you.
The weather is changing. Winters are slowly setting in. This is a good month for health. Some find it a good season for eating. Some find it good for wearing nice clothes. Besides food and clothes it is a good season for health. Don’t let it go waste. Make the most of it.
Thank You.


3. DECEMBER 14, 2014
My Dear Fellow Countrymen,
Today I have this great opportunity of interacting with you again. You must be wondering why a Prime Minister should be interacting the way I am doing it. Well, first and foremost, I am a less of your Prime Minister and more of a Pradhan Sewak (serving the people). Since childhood I have been hearing that by sharing, our intensity of pain become less while the intensity of our joys grow manifold. Well I think, this is the guiding thought behind Mann ki Baat. It is an opportunity for me to sometimes share my concern and sometimes my joy. Sharing my deepest concerns with you makes me feel light hearted and sharing my joy just doubles my happiness.
Last time, I mentioned my concern about the youth of the country. It is not because you chose me as the Prime Minister but because I feel concerned as an individual. Sons and daughters of many families are caught in the trap of drugs. It just does not destroy the person involved, but his entire family, the society and the Nation at large. Drug is such a grave menace which destroys the most powerful individuals.
While serving as the Chief Minister of Gujarat, my officers with good records would often come to ask for leave. Initially they would hesitate to spell out the reasons, however on insisting they revealed that their child had fallen into the drug trap and they now need to spend time with their kids and rehabilitate them. I could see the bravest of my officers struggling to control their tears. I met suffering mothers too. In Punjab I had the chance to meet some mothers who were very angry and yet concerned about their children who had fallen into the trap of drugs.
We have to work together as a society to tackle this menace. I understand that the youth who fall into this drug trap are often blamed. We blame these youth as being careless and irresponsible. We perceive that the victims are bad but the fact is that the drugs are bad. The youth are not wrong; it is this addiction which is wrong. Let us not blame and wrong our kids. Let us get rid of this habit of addiction and not victimize our kids. Blaming the kids would push them further into addiction. This is in fact a psycho-socio-medical issue and let us treat it as such a problem. This menace needs to be handled carefully as its solution is not limited to medical intervention only. The individual concerned, his family, friends, the society, the government and the legal system all have to work in tandem to tackle this menace. Each one of us have to contribute to get rid of this menace..
A few days ago, I had organized a DGP level conference in Assam. I expressed my concern over this issue and my displeasure at the non-serious attitude of the people concerned. I have asked the police department to seriously discuss this issue and come out with relevant solutions. I have suggested the department to launch a toll free helpline. The families often feel ashamed to come out in open about the addiction problem of their children. They have no one to confide in. Parents from any part, any corner of the country can freely approach the police if their children have fallen a victim to addiction. The department has taken this suggestion seriously and working towards its fulfillment.
The drug menace brings about the Three D’s. These Three D’s are not the ones related to entertainment but I am talking about the Three D’s related to the three vices.
First D is Darkness, the second D is Destruction and the third D is Devastation.
Drugs lead a person to a blind path of destruction. There is nothing left in its trail but devastation. This is a topic of great concern and demands total attention.
I had mentioned this topic in my last address in Mann ki Baat. We received more than 7000 letters on our Akashvani address. Some letters were received in the government offices. We received responses on government portal, Mygov.in, online and through e-mails. Lakhs of comments were received on twitter and facebook. Hence, a deep rooted concern in the society’s psyche has found a voice.
I am especially thankful to the media of our country for carrying this concern forward. Many channels conducted hour long programs. These programs were not just meant to criticize the government. They were forums for open discussion, a concern and an effort to come out with workable solutions. These initiatives created background for healthy discussions. The government was also sensitized to its responsibilities in this direction. The government can no longer remain neutral to these concerns.
There is a question I want to ask these youth caught in the drug trap. I want to ask these youth that when for three or four hours they are in a state of intoxication, they might be feeling free of all concerns, free of all tensions and in a different world altogether. But have you ever lent a thought to the fact that when you buy drugs where does this money go to? Have you ever thought about it? Just make a guess. What if this drug money goes to the terrorists? What if this money is spent by the terrorists to procure weapons? And with this weapon the very same terrorist might be pumping bullets in the heart of my soldiers. The soldier of my country gets martyred. Have you ever thought about our soldiers- a soldier who is so dear to his mother, the treasured son of Mother India, the brave son of the soil is hit by a bullet probably funded by the money spent on purchasing drugs. I know and firmly believe that you too love your motherland and have tremendous respect for our soldiers. Then how can you support a habit which funds drug mafia and the terrorists.
Some people feel that when a person is in despair, faces failures and when he is directionless, he is an easy prey to drugs. But I feel that people who lack ambition, do not have any set goals and targets, who have a deep vacuum in their lives, are the ones where drugs will have an easy access. If you want to avoid drugs and save your children from this menace then foster ambition in them, give them dreams to pursue and make them individuals with a desire to achieve something in life. Then you will see that they will not be easily distracted. Their aim then will be to achieve something in life.
Have you ever followed a sportsman’s life? A sportsman is motivated forever. In the bleak winters everyone feels like sleeping in the warmth of a quilt but a sportsman will still rise at 4 or 5 and go for his workouts. Why? because the goal is set. Similarly, if your child would be aimless, there are chances of him/her to fall prey to menace like drugs.
I remember the words of Vivekananda. These words are very apt for all the young people. Just keep repeating this thought over and over again. “Take a thought, make it your life. Ponder on it and dream about it. Make it an integral part of your dreams. Make it a part of your mind, brain, veins and each and every part of your body and forget everything else”.
This thought of Vivekananda is apt for every young person and that is why I say that each person should have an ambition in life. Having an ambition does not allow your focus on unnecessary things.
Some take it under peer pressure because it looks “cool”, some consider it as a style statement. So sometimes the youth inadvertently fall into this serious trap, due to the wrong mental perception. Addiction is neither cool nor a style statement. In reality, it is a precursor to destruction. So whenever your friends boast about their drug habits, do not applaud and enjoy such conversation. Do not be a mute spectator to such absurdities. Have the courage to stand against such conversations and say NO. Have the guts to despise such a conversation, reject such a conversation and have the guts to tell the person that he is wrong.
I would like to share some views with the parents too. These days none of us have time. All of us are running against time to earn our livelihood. We are racing against time to improve the quality of our lives. But in this blind race, do we have the time to spare for our kids. Do we ever work for our kid’s spiritual progress and discuss it with them, rather we discuss only material progress. How are they doing in their studies, what has been their progress in exam, what to eat and what not to eat, where to go and where not to go – majorly these topics form the core of the entire interactions. Do we share such a relationship that our children can bare their hearts to us? I request all of you to do this. If your children share a frank relationship then you can very well know what is going on in their life. Children do not take to bad habits suddenly. It happens gradually and it also impacts the home. Observe the changes that are happening in your home. If you observe closely then I believe that you may be successful in detecting the problem at the very beginning. Be aware of your child’s friend circle and don’t keep your conversations focused just about progress. Your concern should extend to their inner depths, their thoughts, their logic, their books, their friends and their mobiles – how and where are they spending their time. These need to be taken care of. I believe that no one else can do what a parent can for their kids. Our ancestors have left us certain pearls of wisdom and that is why they are known as statesmen. A saying goes like this:
Paanch Varsh Laaw Lijiye
Dass Laaw Tadan dei
Paanch Varsh Laaw Lijiye
Dass Laaw Tadan dei
Sut Hi Solah Varsh Mein
Mitra Sarij Gani Dei
This means that till 5 years of age a child should grow in the loving and tender care of his parents, by the time he is 10 the values of discipline should be inculcated in him. Sometimes we see that an intelligent mother gets angry and does not speak with her child throughout the day. This is a big punishment for the child. The mother punishes herself but the child too gets punished in turn. The mother just has to say that I will not talk and the 10 year old will remain worried the whole day long. He changes his habit and by the time he is of 16 years then the relationship should turn like a friend towards him. There should be an open conversation with him. This is a brilliant advice which has been passed on by our ancestors. I would like to see this inculcated in our family life.
Another thing brought to our notice is the role of the pharmacists. Some of the medicines lead to addiction. So such medicines should not be distributed without a doctor’s prescription. Sometimes a simple thing like a cough syrup can trigger addiction. It becomes the starting point for addiction. There are quite a few things that I would not like to raise from this platform. But we will have to follow and accept this discipline.
These days many children from villages go to city for higher education and start living in a hostel or a boarding school. I have heard that sometimes these avenues become the entry point of such addiction. For this the education system, the society and the security force will have to act as a vigilante. Each one will have to fulfill their roles and responsibilities. The government will fulfill the responsibilities on its end. We should constantly strive to fulfill our obligations.
I would also like to mention about the letters we have received. Some of them are interesting, some are filled with grief and some are inspiring. I cannot mention all, but I would like to mention one. There was a certain Mr. Dutt. He was deep into addiction .He was also jailed where he had several restrictions. Then later his life changed. He studied in jail and then his life was transformed. His story is very famous. He was in Yerawada Jail. There might be many such inspiring stories. Many people have been victorious in their fight against addiction. We too can come out of such habits and so we should definitely try. We should make efforts for de-addiction and rehabilitation. I would ask celebrities to be a part of this initiative – be it from the field of cinema, sports or someone concerned with public life. Be it the cultural or spiritual world, we should use every possible platform to create awareness. There should be constant messages in public interest. They will certainly have an effect. Those active on the social media, I would request them to create a continuous online movement by joining #DrugsFreeIndia hash-tag. This is more relevant because most of the addicted youth are a part of the social media. If we take this #DrugsFreeIndia hash-tag movement forward then we will do a great service for public awareness and education.
I want to take this concern forward. I would request all those who have successfully come out of this addiction to share their stories. I touched this topic because like I said in the beginning grief becomes less on sharing. This is a topic of national concern and I am not here to sermonize. And neither am I entitled to preach. I am just sharing my grief with you. Those families who are suffering from this menace, I want to share their pain as well. I want to create a responsible environment. There can be difference of opinions but let us make a beginning somewhere.
Like I mentioned before, I want to share happiness. Last week I had the opportunity to meet the Blind Cricket Team. They had won the world cup. What joy and excitement, they were exuding great self confidence. God has given us everything, eyes, hands, legs i.e. we are totally capable yet we lack this kind of determination and passion which I could see in the blind cricketers. What zeal and enthusiasm, really it was contagious. I felt super charged after meeting them. Such incidents bring great pleasure in life.
In the past few days there was yet another important news. The cricket team from Kashmir defeated Mumbai on their home ground. I do not view it as a matter of someone’s victory and other’s loss. I view it differently. All the stadiums in Kashmir have been inundated after the floods. Kashmir is passing through a tough phase. The circumstances have been extremely grim with these boys not standing any chance to practice. But the Team Spirit shown by these boys, their conviction and determination is awe inspiring. These boys have shown us that one can overcome the most trying and testing circumstances if one remains focused on our goals. This news gave me immense pleasure and I take this opportunity to congratulate all these players on their victory.
Two days back, the United Nations has decided to celebrate June 21st as International Yoga Day. It is a matter of great pride and honour for India. Our ancestors developed a beautiful tradition and today the entire world is associated with it. It does not merely benefit one personally but it has the potential to bring all the people together globally. The entire world came together on the issue of Yoga in the UN and a unanimous resolution was passed just two days back. 177 countries became the co-sponsors. In the past when it was decided to celebrate the birthday Mr. Nelson Mandela, 165 countries became co-sponsors. Before that efforts were on for International Toilet Day and 122 nations became co-sponsors to that initiative too. For celebrating Oct 2nd as Non Violence Day 140 Countries became co-sponsors, before that. But 177 countries co- sponsoring Yoga is a world record of sorts. I am thankful to all the countries that have come out in support and have honored the sentiments of the Indians and decided to observe World Yoga Day. It is now our duty that Yoga reaches out to the masses in its true essence.
Last week I had the chance to have a meeting with the Chief Ministers of all the states. This tradition has been going on for the past 50-60 years. This time it was organized at the Prime Minister’s residence. We started it as a retreat program with no papers, no files and no officers. It was a simple interaction where the Prime Minister and Chief Minister were all the same, seated together like friends. For an hour or two, matters of national concern were seriously discussed in a friendly atmosphere. Everyone just poured their hearts out. There was no political agenda involved. This too was a memorable experience that I wanted to share with you.
Last week I had the chance to travel to the North East. I had been there for three days. Many a times youth express their desire to see the Taj, Singapore or Dubai. But I would urge all the nature lovers, all who want to experience the divinity in nature, to take a tour of the North East. I had gone earlier too. This time when I went as the Prime Minister, I tried to explore its potential. Our North east has tremendous potential and possibilities. It’s a land of beautiful people and beautiful surroundings. I was filled with immense joy visiting that place. Sometimes people ask Modi ji don’t you get tired? I want to say that whatever little fatigue I had, well the North East took it away completely, I am thoroughly rejuvenated. Such is the pleasure that I derived from that visit. The love and respect accorded by the people there is something that will stay with me forever. The kinship and affinity showed by the people of the North East touched me deeply. I will also tell you, it is not a joy for only Modi to enjoy, it is there for you to enjoy too. So do travel to the North East and enjoy.
The next edition of Mann Ki Baat will happen in 2015. This is probably my last program in 2014. I wish you all a Merry Christmas. I would like to wish all the very best of New Year hes in advance. It gives me immense pleasure to know that this program Mann Ki Baat is broadcast in regional languages by the Local Radio stations that same night at 8 pm. And it is surprising to know some of the regional voice-over artists also speak in the voice very similar to me. I am surprised at the brilliant work being done by the artists associated at Akashvani and I would like to congratulate them. I consider this as an effective medium to connect to the masses. We have had tremendous response. Seeing the response Akashvani has devised a new method. They have taken a new Post Box number. So now if you wish to write into me you can write on this Post Box number.
Mann Ki Baat
Post Box no 111, Akashvani
New Delhi.
I will be awaiting your letters. You do not realize that your letters become my inspiration. Some suggestions penned down can do good to the entire nation. I am thankful to you all. We will meet next in 2015 and on some Sunday morning we will again have our own Mann Ki Baat.
Thank you very much.
4. JANUARY 27, 2015
5. 6. FEBRUARY 22, 2015


Hello, my young friends. Today probably the entire day you must have been preoccupied with the ongoing cricket match. On the one hand you have exams and on the other this world cup, you might be asking your younger sister to tell you the score of the match from time to time. Sometimes you must be elated about the fact that Holi is around the corner and then suddenly you would be feeling disappointed that even Holi festivities will go in for a toss. Why? Because the exams are approaching and I am sure you must be feeling this way. But friends, I am there with you in your moment of crisis. This is an important occasion for you; hence I am there to offer my support. I am not here to lecture you; I intend to have some light conversations with you.
You have been studying hard and you are tired. Mother scolds you and so does your father and teachers. God only knows what all you have to hear day in and out. Keep the phone, switch off the TV, entire day you are glued to the computer- everyday you must be hearing the same things. Be it the class X or the class XII, the whole year long you might be getting to hear the same things. And you might be sincerely wishing that sooner the exams finish better it will be, isn’t it? I understand your mental condition and hence I am here to share Mann ki baat with you. But this topic is a little difficult.
As far as today’s topic is concerned, the parents might be wishing that I touch those issues that they cannot discuss with their children. Teachers must be wishing that I say the right things to the kids and the students might be wishing that I say things which might ease the pressure at home. I do not know who will benefit from my conversation but I will have the satisfaction to know that I was there with my young friends in the most important occasion of their life, that I was sharing my inner feelings with them. This is my idea behind the conversations. I do not have the right to guide you on how to write a paper or how to pass the exams well. I cannot guide you on the tricks to obtain better marks because I consider myself an average student on such issues. I have myself never scored well in any exams in my life. I was a very average student and on top of that I had a very bad handwriting. So I think that most of the time I passed the exams as the teachers could not comprehend my handwriting. Well so much for the light talks.
But today I want to definitely tell you something important. How you approach exams goes a long way in deciding the results of your exams. There are many people I have seen who view this as the most important challenge of their lives and they believe that a failure here means failure for life. But friends, this is not so, and so don’t take undue stress. Yes, you must be determined to get good results. The determination should be strong and the motivation high. But the exams should not be a burden. This is not the exam which is going to test your performance in life. So do not bother much about it.
Sometimes, don’t you think we tend to make exams a huge burden and the reason behind this is that if we have friends and relatives who have children studying in the same class as your child, if your child and your relative’s child are also in class tenth, then there is constant comparison? There is a feeling that our child should fare better than everyone else’s child, even your friend’s child. And it is this constant comparison that creates a pressure on your child. You feel that your child earns a name amongst the family and friends. But is it really his name or your own prestige that you are worried about? Don’t you feel that you are the one responsible for making your child a part of an undue competition? Can’t we associate him to larger vision and greater meaning of life? How does he cope with the competition to be same as your neighbor’s friend circle? And is this really what you want? Just give s thought on it? Just think, in trying to compete with others, how you have belittle your own child’s life. Is it fair? When you talk to children, talk about big dreams, talk of greater heights that can be achieved and you will see a change happening.
Friends, there is something that always bothers us. We always measure our success in comparison to others. Our entire energy is spent in useless competition. There are many points in life where competition is necessary but for self development competition with others might not be a good motivator but competing with oneself each day should be the primary motivation. So start competing with yourself, compete with yourself to do better, to do faster, to do more and to reach new heights. Concentrate on compete with yourself to make today better than the past. And you will find that this spirit of competition will give you such a lot of joy and satisfaction that you yourself can’t imagine. We remember the athlete Sergei Bubka very fondly. This athlete broke his own records over 35 times. He would test himself only. Every time he would set himself a new challenge and scale new heights. You also follow the same and then see that nothing can stop you from achieving success.
Dear friends, even students are of different types. Some people, irrespective of the exams they may face, they are always happy about it, while some just collapse under the burden of exams. And some keep hiding behind the books in some corner of the house. But despite the type, exams are still exams and it is necessary to pass in them and I also wish that you pass well. But sometimes you must have noticed that we are seeking some causes externally. We seek reasons outside when we are confused about ourselves. We do not have faith in ourselves as if we are giving some exam for the first time. If someone is watching TV and the pitch is loud, we get irritated. If the mother calls for food we are irritated, but at the same time if our friend calls up, we end up chatting for an hour. Don’t you think that you have some confusion about yourself?
Friends it is important for you to identify yourself. Just keep doing simple things; you do need to go far. If you have a sister or your friend has a sister and who is appearing in X or XII standard exam, just observe them. You will see, whether it is X or XII, the girls will definitely help the mothers in the household chores. Have you ever thought that how do they manage to do work and yet score well in exams. Nowadays the girls are far ahead of boys in examination results. Just observe this around you.
This will make you realize that issues that bother you are not external. Sometimes the reasons are internal. If you are in self doubt then confidence cannot help. And that is why I say that as confidence dips, blind faith starts to envelope us and we then start seeking excuses outside. Some students are such that we call them Aarambhishura. Everyday a new thought, everyday a new desire, everyday a new resolution, and then this resolution dies an early death and we are left where we started. I clearly believe that these ever changing desires are called whims by the people. Friend, family and relatives make fun of you and hence I would suggest that you have fixed desires. These desires in turn will become resolutions. And resolutions can never be futile. Resolutions are accompanied by goals. And when goals and action come together, resolutions are achieved. That is why I say Desire + Stability = Resolution. Resolution + action = achievements. I have complete faith that in your life too achievements will be at your feet if only you dedicate yourself. Dedicate yourself to your commitment and keep it positive. Don’t be bothered about defeating others. Think of taking yourself further from where you already are. And so test yourself everyday against your own limits, so that however big a challenge in life comes, we will not have any problem. And why should someone else take our exam? Make it a habit to take your exam yourself. Each day we will test ourselves. We will see if we have progressed from where we were yesterday. Have I reached further than yesterday, have I achieved more than what I achieved yesterday. Each day, every moment, keep testing yourself. Then such tests will bother you no more in life. Every exam will be an opportunity to test and regulate oneself and someone who can regulate himself knows to face challenges boldly. And so who sets himself challenges of life finds these classroom exams very small.
Sometimes we far exceed our own expectations. Just try and remember the good works that you have done. You will be surprised at your own achievement. Last year you were sick and yet you got good marks. Last year your uncle got married, one full week got wasted but still you managed to score very well. Earlier you would sleep for six hours and then last year you decided you will sleep for only five hours and you did it. What advice can Modi give you? You become your own advisor and as Lord Buddha said Uppa Deepo Bhavahah.
It is my belief that one should recognize one’s inner light, recognize one’s potential. Those who set themselves a new limit each time are the ones who scale greater heights. Secondly, sometimes we are busy thinking about the distant future. Some people live in the past. Don’t do so during your exams. During examinations it is better to be in the present. Does a batsman anytime try and recall when he was out for a duck. Or does he think whether we will win this entire series or not. Once he enters a match does he think that I will come out only after hitting a century? Not really. In my opinion a good batsman is focused on the ball he is facing. He does not think of the next ball or of the match, or of entire series. You also fix your mind in the present. To win there is only one formula. Live in the present, connect with the present. Victory will be yours.
My dear friends, do you think exams are meant to exhibit your capacity. If this is what you think then you are wrong. Who do you have to show your capacity? Who do you need to demonstrate it to? You should think that these exams are not to demonstrate your capacity but to realize your own potential. If you make this basic mantra your calling, your confidence will get a new boost. Once you realize your potential and understand yourself, then you yourself will keep fostering your strengths this strength will translate into a new potential and so don’t take exams as a medium of exhibition, take it as an opportunity. This is an opportunity to know oneself, to explore oneself and to be living with oneself. So live on, my friends.
Friends I have seen that there are many students who become nervous during exams. Some go to the extent that look today was my exam and Mama did not even wish me. Uncle did not wish me and elder brother did not wish me. And probably this issue is debated for an hour or two in the family- who did not wish, who called up to wish, did he send flowers or not. Friends rise above all this, do not get involved in all this. Think about all this when exams are over. If you have faith in yourself then such things will not arise. I have seen that many students become nervous. I know that some people have the tendency to become nervous. Some families have such an environment. I believe that the reason for nervousness is the lack of faith in oneself. How do you get this faith in yourself- if you gain mastery in your subject, you have worked hard and have done multiple revisions. If you have the confidence that you have mastery in some subject, you will see that out of the 5-7 subjects there are only 2-3 topics for which you are never worried. Nervousness is about some one or two topics. If you have mastered the subject you will not be nervous.
All the hard work that you have done in the past year, all those books that you have studied through the night they will not go waste. It will be there somewhere in your mind. As soon as you sit on your examination desk it will come back to you. You should trust your knowledge, your information. Have the faith that all the hard work you have done will certainly bear fruit and secondly be confident about your strengths. You should have the faith that however difficult the exam is, you will crack it successfully. However lengthy the exam is, ‘I will successfully complete it’. You should be confident about the timing, be it a two hour or a three hour paper that you will finish it before time. I still remember, maybe you have been told too, our teachers instructed us to do easy questions first and tackle the difficult ones later. I believe someone must have told you the same and I believe that you will follow it.
Friends, I have received many suggestions and experiences on MyGov.in. I will pass them on to the education ministry but I would like to mention a few things here.
Arnav Mohta writes from Mumbai, Maharashtra that some people make these exams an issue of life and death. As if entire world will finish if one fails these exams. Vinita Tiwari writes from Varanasi that the news of children committing suicide on the declaration of these results saddens her. You too must be hearing such news, but I have got good response from it from another gentleman. Mr. R Kamath has send in some good words. He has asked the students not to become worriers but warriors. Really we should not sink in worries but should be a warrior in the battlefield. I believe that we should not drown in our worries; we should march ahead with the belief that victory will be ours. Life is very long. There are ups and downs but one should not perish with them. Sometimes, unwanted results are an indication to move forward. They give us the opportunity to find new strength.
I have also witnessed another thing. Students as soon as they are out of the examination hall, they start estimating how they fared. Friends and family too ask the same question. How was today’s paper? Whatever is finished is over, please forget about it. I would also request the parents not to ask such questions. As soon as he gets out say, oh the glow on your face says that you have done well. Ok good…. Let us go and prepare for tomorrow. Create this mood and friends I also tell you… what will be the impact if you calculate and come to know that two questions are wrong and you would lose 6 marks, then tell me will it not impact your performance the other day? So why waste time on this? Why waste your energy on this? After all the exams are over, whatever calculations you want to make you are free to do them. How many marks will be scored, that should not be your concern at the time of exams. After the paper finishes concentrate on the next day’s paper, forget the day’s paper and you will see your burden lessening by 20-25 %.
Quite a few thoughts are rising in my mind. I do not know if they will be useful now that the exams are near. But I would like to tell my educator and academician friends that can’t we celebrate a week long exam festival twice in a year in each term. It should have a sarcastic poetry session, or a cartoon competition, a debate competition. There should be someone to lecture on the psychological aspects of exams so that this tension around the exams gets eliminated. If exams become a celebration then the students would not need to spend time like the way they are doing today in hearing this out. The students will themselves become confident. Also I believe that while teaching the syllabus, a separate lecture should be conducted on topics pertaining to exams. This environment of tension is not conducive.
Friends, I know that whatever I am telling you, you must have heard a lot more than that. Your parents must have lectured you, so must have the teachers. I do not want to confuse you by talking more on this subject. I want to believe that all the sons and daughters of this land who are going to give exams remain happy and joyful and give exams with a free mind.
I am talking to make you happy. You will get good results .You will be successful, make exams a celebration, give exams in a joyful mood, enjoy achievement each day, and change the entire atmosphere. Parents, teachers, and school –all should get together and experience what it is like to challenge the challenges, how wonderful it feels to convert each moment into an opportunity. And remember you cannot please everyone in the world.
I had a penchant for writing poetry, I had written a poem in Gujarati, I don’t remember it fully but I had written in it- if successful then you are worth being envious of, if failed then you are nowhere.”This is the way of the world. Be successful, not to defeat others but to overcome your challenges, be successful for your own pleasure. Be successful for bringing pleasure to the lives of those others living in this world.
I have this faith that you will succeed with happiness in your heart. You will have great success. And then, whether we could celebrate Holi or not, whether we could attend uncle’s marriage or not, whether I could attend friend’s birthday party or not, could see the Cricket World Cup or not- all these things will become immaterial, as for now your dimensions of happiness will be very different. My best wishes to you. Nation’s future is as bright as your own future. India’s future will be defined by India’s youth; it will be defined by you. Be it the sons or daughters, both have to work in tandem to take the country forward.
Come make the exam festival into a celebration. My best wishes to you!!!
7. MARCH 22, 2015
Greetings to all my dear Farmer brothers and sisters!
Today, I feel so fortunate to avail this opportunity to speak with my farmer brothers and sisters from different corners of the country. When I speak to farmers, I speak to the village and its residents, and also to the farm labourers. I am also speaking to the mothers and sisters who work on the farm fields. And in this context probably this feeling is a little different from all the interactions I had through Mann ki Baat.
When I decided to speak about farmers in Mann Ki Baat, I never expected that the farmers from far off villages across the country would be willing to ask numerous questions and would provide such information. I was taken aback to receive your numerous letters and questions in such huge numbers. I can say that you all are very aware and active and you all probably yearn that somebody listens to you. First of all I would like to express my heartfelt greetings to you all. I have read your letters and understood the agony and struggle in your lives. Despite bearing so much misery, I cannot imagine what all you have gone through in your lives.
You all have taken me aback but I take this Mann ki Baat to be an opportunity for education and experience. My dear farmer brothers and sisters, I would like to assure you, that all your questions and queries from different aspects that you brought to my notice would be addressed by me and I will bring consciousness and sensitivity on those subjects in my government and not let my village, my poor people, my farmer brothers will not be forced to live in this pathetic condition. I am shocked, farmers have written letters related to farming but they have also brought some other issues, like the problems they face with the village mafias and gangs. I can understand the problems related to natural calamities, but they are also facing the issues with small time businessmen.
Some farmers have to drink contaminated water in their villages, some have raised concerns on the facilities to provide shelter to their cattle, and some have also mentioned that there is no facility to dispose off the dead animals, which leads to various diseases among the villagers. This suggests that today through Mann Ki Baat, the governing bodies are getting a unique chance to understand numerous problems of the farmers. We can attain our rights to govern the country only when we can understand and provide solution to all these small but important issues. I feel so embarrassed when I read your letters and think what we have done so far. I have no answer to this question. What have we done? Yes, you words have touched my heart. I will try my best to bring a change and would awaken the sleeping government to run in the most appropriate manner. This will be my primary focus and that is a promise from my side.
I am aware that you had to face great difficulties last year due to scarcity of rain. This year, due to the unseasonal rain and hail-storm, all the states above Maharashtra had to bear a lot of difficulties. Farmers, across all the corners of the country had to face great difficulties. A poor farmer who leads his life through slogging in the fields has no other source of living or income. I am with you in this difficult time of your life. Our government is also taking stock of the situation minutely, on various issues of the farmer and is in touch with different departments of the state. The ministers are also out in the field visiting various states and collecting reviews and analysing its situation. I have also asked the state governments to work closely along with the central government and strive to help as much as possible to our farmer brothers and sisters in this situation. I can assure you that the government will take proper steps and solve your problems promptly and help you in this difficult time. We will do whatever is possible to help you and do our best to fulfil those.
Villagers and farmers have raised various issues. Irrigation problem is one of the most important issues. Farmers are also angry due to the unavailability of roads in villages. They are also unhappy about the increasing price of fertilizers. There is no electricity. They are also unhappy about the fact that they are unable to educate their children, which in their wish is also a complaint. Mothers and sisters are angry with the drug abuse prevailing in the villages. Some women have also addressed the issues of tobacco intake by their husbands. I can understand your pain. Some farmers believe that they can only hear the strategies adopted by the government, but it never reaches the villagers. Farmers have mentioned that they slog day and night to provide food to the entire nation, but they never receive the full amount of money in return. When they go out to sell the crops and other farm products, there is no one to buy from us. So, they are left with no other option, than to sell the products at lower prices. They are doomed in both the case, if they produce more or less. This means farmers have brought to my notice their inner thoughts through their letters. I can assure all my farmer brothers and sisters that the state and central government will take proper steps actively from now on. I will inspire the government to speed up the actions and provide solutions to all your problems. I can understand that you are losing patience. This is quite natural as you have waited for sixty long years. I will try to find a full-proof solution to this.
My farmer brothers, I have found one primary problem among your various questions that is the ‘Acquisition of Land Bill’, prevailing in almost all the states. I am shocked to hear these rumours spread across the country. It is good that you have raised such small issues and questions. I will try to bring the truth before you. You must be aware that the Acquisition of Land bill was passed 120 years ago. Post-independence, this law was practised till 60-65 years. Today, the activists, who call themselves as the supporters of farmers, also practised this law in the country, governed the country and the farmers got their share. Everybody believed that there should be a change in this law and I too believed in the change. We were in the opposition and we too believed in the change of law.
In the year 2013, a new law was passed in haste. We too supported this law giving our full support to the government. If a law benefits the farmers, who would not like to support it, so we too supported the law. But after the initiation of the law, some of the concerns got raised in our minds. We felt that this way we would be betraying the hopes of farmers. We do not have any rights to betray the farmers. On one side, when our government was formed, we saw that all the states raised their voice to amend the law, to improve the law; the law must be modified to plug the loop holes. On the other side, we found that no state is ready to implement the law, only Maharashtra and Haryana governments under Congress rule had implemented the law who proclaim to be well-wishers of farmers, they brought an ordinance and decided to provide just half of the decided amount as compensation. What kind of justice is this to the farmers? After reviewing all these points, we felt that there should be some re-thinking. When things are done in haste then some drawbacks remain. The motive might be good but if there are drawbacks, then they should be rectified.
Now, I will speak of most primary drawback, which you all will find quite astonishing. All the people, who are self-proclaimed well-wishers of farmers are not ready to give any answers to these questions. Are you all aware that there are 13 different laws in our country through which most of our country’s land, like Railway, National Highway and minefields is acquired. Are you aware that in the law of previous government, these 13 areas have been excluded from the law? With this exclusion, I mean that the farmers would receive the same compensation as they used to get under the previous law. You tell me, is this not a drawback? This was a mistake or not? This was a mistake or not? We have modified this law and the farmers would receive four times the compensation, even if these 13 areas be used for railways or highways. We have tried to improve the law. Who would say that this amendment is against the farmers? This is why; we had brought an ordinance. If we wouldn’t have brought the enactment, the lands of farmers would have been used according to the previous law and they would not have received their compensation. When this law was passed, many in the government too raised their voice against this law. Even those who were involved in the making of the law, got upset and said that this law is neither beneficial to the farmers, nor the village or to the country. This law can be useful, it was said only to fill the treasury of the officers and for their enjoyment, to promote red-tapism. If this was the truth, apt modifications should have been done or not? Thus, we have tried to eliminate the drawbacks of the law and work on the direction of betterment of the farmers. Firstly, we have included the 13 laws which were excluded under the Acquisition of Land Bill, so that the farmers are provided with the remuneration and all rights and they do not have to incur loss due to the exclusion. I have heard the rumours being spread, that Modi government is passing a law, which will provide less remuneration to the farmers and they will not receive the full compensation.
My dear farmer brothers and sisters, I cannot even think of committing this sin. In the year 2013, under the dispensation of previous government, the compensation which was decided has not been modified a bit. We have decided to provide four times the compensation than the one provided earlier. Not only this, we have also included the 13 areas which were excluded in the earlier law. We have also continued with the clause that in case of acquisition of land for development of the city, the land owners will receive 20% of the developed land, so that they are benefited financially at all times. The youth of the family gets a job. We have also decided to provide employment to the children of the farmers. We have also added a new programme. The new addition is that the district authorities will have to announce that who will be employed from the family, in what field they will be employed and what will be their work location. Government will have to provide written announcement for the same. We have fixed the government responsibility by adding this feature.
My dear farmer brother and sisters, we all agree that the government land must be used first. Post this, the barren land must be used. Lastly, when there is no option left, the farm lands can be touched. So, we have started a survey for finding all the barren lands, for making it a priority for usage.
We have received complaints from our farmers that more than the required land is for use is gobbled up. With the enactment of this new law, I can assure you that before using the land, a survey will be conducted, and then it will be decided so that more than the required land is not acquired. Sometimes, in the foresight that something is going to happen, there is lot of damage. In the name of Social Impact Assessment (SIA), if these judicial proceedings are carried on for several years, how can a farmer take a right decision in this situation? He cannot decide whether to grow the crops in the field, as he is in a fix as he will keep thinking that the judgement can come any day. This will lead to two to four years of loss and things will be stuck due to red-tapism. Due to the long and difficult proceedings, a poor farmer is forced to beg before the officers to get their work done – Sir, please write this, please do not write this…. this is going to happen, that is going to happen. I do not want my farmers to fall prey to these officers. I do not think this is a right thing to do. Procedures were long and difficult. I have tried to make this procedure simple and easy.
My dear farmer brothers and sisters, the law was passed in the year 2014, but the states have not adopted the law yet. Farmers are still at the same place. States have opposed this law. Please tell me if I should listen to the states or not? I should trust the states or not? How can a country run without trusting its own states? So, I believe we should trust our states and we should specially trust our central government. One, I am willing to trust my states and secondly the improvement we are trying to bring in the law by trying to eliminate the drawbacks and trying to better the conditions of the farmers, even after this, if the states are not ready to support this movement, they are free to do so. That is why; I would like to request you all not to fall prey to these rumours. These rumours are absolutely ‘against farmer’ rumours. It is part of the conspiracy of keeping the farmers poor as always. This is a part of the conspiracy of not taking the country forward. We have to save ourselves from this conspiracy and save our country and save our farmers as well.
Now, if one were to ask the farmer residing in the village that what are your plans for your three sons? He will respond that one of them will carry on with the farming but the other two will have to seek jobs elsewhere. So, now even the sons of farmers are seeking out jobs. They too have to move out and seek employment somewhere. So arrangements need to be made for that too. So we have decided that whatever is important for the welfare of the village, welfare of the farmer and whatever is important for the employment of members of the farming community, all such things should be connected. We are the ones who believe in “Jai Jawan Jai Kisan”. Jai Jawan is related to the security of the country. As far as the security of the nation is concerned, the farmers of the nation do not ever step back from their responsibilities. If some land is required for national security we will have to ask the farmers for it. And I have complete faith that the farmers will give us the land. So we have added the clause for taking land for such purposes. I want to ask each and every member of the village, is road required or not? If water is required in the fields, don’t we need to create canals? There are still many poor families in the village who do not have a house to live in. Is not land required for construction of houses? Tell me is this for the industrialists? Is this land being demanded for the ultra rich? Try and understand the truth.
Yes, there is something I want to announce without a doubt. In the new ordinance too, any private industrialist, owner of a manufacturing unit, will have to follow the same set of rules that were laid out in the Land Acquisition Act of 2013. The rules for the corporates are the same as in 2013. Then why this lies are being spread. My farmer brother and sisters, misunderstanding is being created that you will not get your legal rights, that you cannot approach the courts. This is entirely false. No government at the centre can take away your legal rights. The constitution given to us by Baba Saheb Ambedkar ensures that you can approach any court in any part of the country. All we have done is to bring some sort of system to your doorsteps.
We have created an Authority. Now this Authority will work at district level and the issues of the farmers will be resolved at the district level itself by the Authority. And if you are not satisfied with the solutions offered there you can approach the courts as well. This is the arrangement we have made.
There is a misconception that the law related to returning the acquired land in five years has been scrapped. This is not true, dear farmer brothers and sisters, what we have said whenever a project is undertake, a timeline has to be specified in terms of the number of years in which it will be completed. If the project is not completed in the specified time period, then whatever farmer’s wish has to be adhered to. So we have set a timeframe for government projects. What is the today’s case scenario, those lands which were acquired about 40 years ago, the government has not done anything on them. This cannot continue any longer. We have decided to set a time limit to governmental projects. Yes there are projects which take time, maybe around 20 years. For example if 500 km long railway track is to be laid then it will take time. So we want it all written down, the time frame in which a project will be completed. So, what we are doing is fixing the liability of the government. We have fixed the government’s responsibility.
Let me also tell you something, dear farmer brothers. Those sitting in the air conditioned rooms who formulate these rules have no idea of the condition of the villagers. Whenever a dam is made or a reservoir is constructed, the rule is to acquire land till the point where there is a possibility of water getting to the maximum level in a span of 100 years. So the water gets filled once in 100 years. For 99 years no water gets filled. Yet the land lies with the government. What is currently happening in the states is that land has been acquired, compensation paid and yet farmers are working on those lands. If the land gets flooded once in 100 years, that year the land can be taken. The law of 2013 denied the farmers the right to cultivate the land. All we want is that if the land does not get flooded then it should be available for farmers for cultivation. And hence that land should not be acquired from the farmer. This kind of flexibility is necessary. So the farmer benefits even after giving up the land and also get compensation in lieu of their land. This will doubly benefit the farmers. This kind of organization is both necessary and practical. And we are the ones who have thought about it.
Another misconception being spread is that “consent” is not necessary. I urge you, my brothers and sisters to protect yourself from such politically motivated propaganda. The law which was promulgated in 2013 has no provision for consent in schemes for which the government is acquiring land. So people are being misled on this consent issue. The issue of consent did not exist previously, it does not exist now. And so my brothers and sisters, to say that it was beneficial for you before but it is not so now, this is an unfortunate attempt to mislead you. I assure and insist that this consent clause is very much functional in case of private industries, corporate and individual enterprise.
Another thing I would like to share that some people talk about the PPP model. Dear brother and sisters, if a road worth Rs.100 crores is made, will the corporate run away with it? The ownership of the road will be with the government. The ownership of the land is with the government. The construction agency is different. The construction agency is different because the government does not have the requisite amount of money. The government wants that a road be made in the village, as well as hospital and the poor children get education, so monetary investment is required. The private investors construct roads but not for themselves. He does not take it with himself; he makes it for the government. In a way he invests his money. This means in a government project someone else puts in the money which is called the PPP model. But the ownership rests with the government and government means of all of you, of the 125 crore Indians and hence we have said there that there is no need for a consent. Hence it was necessary for me to dispel these myths around the PPP model.
Sometimes this issue of consent will increase red-tapism and nepotism. Tell me, there is a village; a road has been constructed till that village, now a road has to be constructed till the next village which is 5 kms ahead. The road for the first village has been made, but the land for the road to other village lies with the previous village. So tell me will the villagers wilfully give land for road till the other village? Tell me will they give their consent? So what sin have the people of other village committed? Should they not get the roads? Similarly, if I am making a canal, this village has got the water and we have to provide water supply to another village and the said land falls with the people of the previous village who already have water and they deny giving their consent for acquiring their land and say that we already have the water, we are not going to give consent for land acquisition for supply of water to another village. So now you tell me, the people of the other village should get water or not?
My brothers and sisters, this is a practical issue. So we are evolving a process which does not take long. This is for the farmers’ right, not for industries and industrialists. It is for the betterment of the villages, the villagers and the benefit of their children.
Another issue is coming up. I have said this before. In every farmer family, the farmer wants one son to do farming and the others to take up other sources of employment. Such are the times today that different efforts need to be mad to run the household. If we make a road and government establishes an Industrial Corridor next to it, which is not private. I again reiterate that a Corridor by the government, not for the rich, or the industrialists, so if the government makes a Corridor on the left or right of a 50 or 100 km road, then all the residents of the near those villages – maybe 50, 100, 200 villages falling along it will have an opportunity for employment, their kin will get employment.
Tell me dear brother and sisters, do we want the children of our villages to suffocate in the slums of Delhi and Mumbai. Should they not get an employment opportunity closer to their home if a small industry comes up some 20-25 kms away from their village? So this corridor will be made by the government and will not be private. The government will make these Corridors and create these employment opportunities for the villagers. This proposal is about government ownership, it is for the betterment of the villages, betterment of the farmers of villages, it is for the betterment of the future generations of the villagers, it is for the betterment of the poor of the villages, it is to make electricity available to the villages. For these there were some drawbacks in the last Land Acquisition Bill, which we have tried to resolve all the shortcomings of this bill authentically. Still I have maintained in the parliament that if anyone feels that there are some short comings, we are ready to make amendments.
When we put the bill in the Parliament, certain leaders of the farming community gave us some suggestions and we added them. We still say that the land acquisition should be pro farmers. We are committed for this. There are lot of lies being spread. I request you, dear brothers to not get swayed and don’t make your decision based on these lies. Important issue is how to make farmers strong, how to make our villages strong. The farmer should get the right price for his efforts; farmers should get a proper market, a proper storage for his production. It is our effort to make right decisions for the betterment of the village and the farmers.
Dear brothers and sisters, it is our effort to see that the nation progresses and so do our farmers by increasing their yield. And so we have introduced “Soil Health Card”. If a person falls sick a laboratory test is undertaken for them, similarly a lab test can be undertaken for our motherland. So we are working not only to protect your land but also to make it healthy.
And so, not land acquisition, but making the land healthy is our task. And so we have introduced the concept of “Soil Health Card”. Every farmer is going to benefit from it. Your undue expenses on fertilizers will be saved. Your yield will increase. That you get proper price for your production, there should be proper granaries, proper rules and regulations and that you are saved from exploitation – we are working on all these issues. I remember, when I was the chief minister of Gujarat, I worked a lot in this direction. The condition of farmers in our Gujarat was very bad, we worked on the water issues and we saw a big change. The farmers made a huge contribution to the development of Gujarat which was beyond all expectations. The entire villages would be deserted, but the change happened. We want this type of change in the entire country, which makes our farmers very happy.
And so my farmer brother and sisters, today I got an opportunity to talk to you. But the issue of the ordinance is making headlines every day and I chose to speak about it more. But my dear brothers and sisters, I will speak to you again and on other issues. But I want to assure you that whatever you have written to me, I will shake the entire government and will make them see the reality about what is actually happening on the ground. I am happy that you have told me so many things and I believe that you have told me because you trust me. I want to assure you that I will not shatter your faith.
I desire your love and blessings at all times. You are the elders of the nation, you can never think wrong for others rather you will suffer loses for other’s benefit. This has been your tradition. And these farmers do not suffer, should have to be the prime focus of my government. Today, after hearing this “Mann ki Baat” many thoughts may have arisen in your mind. Please do write into me at the Akashvani address. I will talk again. Based on your letters, I will try to rectify all the mistakes of my government. I will try to speed up the efforts and if somewhere injustice is being done, I will try and provide justice.
We are in middle of the auspicious festival of Navratri. My Heartfelt Greetings to you All!
8. APRIL 26, 2015
My Dear Countrymen,
Namaskar!
I was not feeling like doing Mann ki Baat today. I am feeling heavy and burdened and little distressed. There were news of hailstorm, unseasonal rains and damages to farmer’s crop when I was talking to all of you last month. Suddenly, out of nowhere strong winds blew in Bihar, causing death of so many people and inflicted lot of damages there. And the earthquake has shaken the entire world on Saturday. It seems the trend of natural disasters has continued. Be it the Nepal earthquake and in India as well the earthquake took lives across various states of India. There has been loss of property because of the earthquake. However, the loss to Nepal is frightening.
I have seen Kutch earthquake very closely on Jan 26, 2001. I can clearly imagine how devastating these disasters are. I can imagine what Nepal and the victimized families there must be going through. But my dear brothers and sisters of Nepal, India is with you in your hour of grief. Work has begun to provide assistance to people facing crisis across several locations in India and Nepal. First and foremost work is rescue operation to save people. Some people must still be alive under the debris and should get evacuated safely from there. A team of experts which has been sent is specifically trained for this task. Sniffer dogs have been sent as they possess the ability to trace any individual staying alive under the debris. Our whole endeavour would be to save maximum number of people alive. Post rescue operation, there is a need to undertake relief work as well. Rehabilitation work will also continue for long. However, humanity has a power of its own. Nepal is a dear to 125 crore people of India. Their grief is our grief. India will make sure to wipe the tears of every Nepali, hold their hands and provide support to them.
Thousands of our Indian brothers and sisters were left stranded in Yemen a few days ago. It was a very tough task to evacuate the Indians alive amidst horrific situation, amidst the tension of bombs and guns, amidst firing but we managed to do so. Not only this, when we safely rescued a new born girl who was just a week old, we felt how much power humanity has. It brings a sense of satisfaction to the mind by rescuing a week old girl alive amidst raining bombs, guns and shadow of death.
Wherever I went overseas in the last few days, I received compliments for one thing and that was for saving citizens of 48 countries of the world in Yemen. Be it the citizen of the US, the UK, France, Russia, Germany, Japan, we helped the citizen of every country. And due to this, the world has experienced the old saying of India, “सेवा परमो धर्मः”, meaning the greatest service to humanity is to serve others. Our Ministry of External Affairs, our Air Force and our Navy have done this work with such courage and responsibility that it will have indelible imprint over the world in the coming days. This is what I believe in. And I am happy that all the people were evacuated safely without any damage and it should be noted that India’s special quality is that our culture is quite old.
Recently when I visited France, I went to a memorial of the First World War there. The reason for visiting the place was that it is the centenary year of the First World War, but at the same time it is the centenary year of India’s valour. This is the centenary year of the sacrifices made by the Indian heroes and “सेवा परमो धर्मः”, meaning the greatest service to humanity is to serve others and how this phrase has been lived by our country; this year is a centenary year for this reason also. I am saying this because very few people would know that about 15 lakh Indian soldiers had put their life at stake during the First World War from 1914 to 1918. And the Indian soldiers did not die for India’s cause. India neither wanted to capture any country, nor did it want to take away anyone’s land. But the Indians had shown amazing strength. Very few people would know that about 74000 of our soldiers sacrificed their life in the First World War. And this is also a matter of pride that about 9200 soldiers, who lost their life, were bestowed with Gallantry Award. Not only this, there were eleven such individuals who received the highest honour of Victoria Cross. About 4700 Indians had sacrificed their life especially during the World War in March 2015 in France, which has made a memorial as a mark of respect for them. I went there to commemorate and express my gratitude to the strength displayed by our ancestors.
If we see all these incidents, then we can say to the world that our country thinks in the direction of peace, happiness and welfare of the world. The country keeps doing something in this direction and if needed put its life at stake. India finds itself in the first row among the highest contributors in the peacekeeping force of the United Nation. That is the matter of pride for us.
In the last few days, I got the opportunity to accomplish two important tasks. We are to celebrate the 125th birth anniversary of respected Babasaheb Ambedkar. There has been a controversy regarding the land where his memorial was to be built for many years. I am satisfied that the Government of India decided to allot the land for building the memorial of Babasaheb Ambedkar. Similarly, there must be an International Centre in the name of Babasaheb Ambedkar in Delhi so that the entire world knows this sage, his thoughts and his work. This was also a matter, which was pending for years. I completed and laid the foundation stone of the memorial. I pledged to complete the work in 20 months, which did not happen for 20 years. And at the same time a thought has also come into my mind and we are working on it. Even today there are many families in our country that are forced to carry dirt on their head. Is it a matter of grace for us that even today some families in our country have to carry the burden of dirt on their head? With all earnest, I said in the government forum to get us free from this blur in the year when we commemorating Babasaheb Ambedkar on his 125th birth anniversary. Now, we will not tolerate a situation where any poor will have to take load of dirt on his head in our country. For this we need the support of the society, government must also shoulder its responsibility. I need cooperation of people as we have to do this work.
Babasaheb Ambedkar used to say ‘Stay Educated’ throughout life. Even today, education has not reached many dalits, exploited, and deprived ones in the society, especially girls. We must also pledge on the occasion of 125th birth anniversary of Babasaheb Ambedkar. There must not be any son or daughter of the poor remaining illiterate in our villages, cities and locality. Government must do its duty. And if it gets the support of the society, then we will definitely feel a sense of satisfaction. I want to share a matter of happiness and share another matter of discomfort as well. I take pride of the fact that two daughters of India have made the country proud. One daughter -Saina Nehwal became the world’s no. 1 in Badminton, and the second daughter Sania Mirza became the world’s top player in Tennis Doubles tournament. Congratulations to both and all the daughters of our country. I feel proud seeing the effort and strength of our own. But sometimes, we lose cool. When the Cricket World Cup was on and we lost to Australia in the semi-finals, the kind of words used and the treatment meted out to the players was not good my countrymen. How can be a game with no defeat? Victory and defeat are part and parcel of life. If the players of our country have been beaten in a match, then we must encourage them in the times of crisis. There must be an effort to create an environment to generate new confidence. I am sure that we will learn from the defeats going forward and we will not lose control in few moments by indulging in action-reaction. And I am getting worried. Whenever I see that anything happens all of a sudden, a mob surrounds and burns the truck, burns the vehicle. And we see these things on TV as well. Accident must not happen. Even the government must make full effort. But my dear countrymen tell me if we should burn the vehicles? Dead ones do not come back. Can’t we ensure law to take its due course keeping our emotion in check?
Well, today my mind has been very grief-stricken due to these incidents, especially due to natural disasters. But amidst this also, we will move forward with courage and confidence. Be it individual of this country – dalit, oppressed, exploited, tribe, villager, poor, farmer, small businessman, we will move forward on the path of welfare for everyone. Examinations of students are over. Especially, the students of 10th and 12th standard must have made a program of celebrating the holidays. I wish all of you a very good vacation; get the opportunity to learn something new. And since you have worked hard the whole year, then I wish that you spend some time with your family with joy and happiness.
Namaskar to everyone.
Thank You!
9. MAY 31, 2015
My Dear Countrymen,
Last time when I addressed Mann ki Baat, I was extremely distracted and upset by the earthquake that had struck then. My mind did not allow me to speak, but still I spoke Mann ki Baat. Today, when I am addressing Mann ki Baat, we are all surrounded by severe hot weather, with all the heat related problems and news from all corners of the country. I would like to request you all to take care of your health in this hot weather by following simple instructions, such as drinking ample amount of water and covering yourself for protection from the heat. At the same time, I would also like to request you all to take care of the birds and animals in your neighbourhood and fulfill their requirements too. We should take this opportunity to give the responsibility to our children to place a bowl of water for the birds in a suitable place where the water does not get heated up. By doing this, I can assure you that your children will imbibe good moral and cultural values. Moreover, in this extreme heat, this act will be a life saver for the birds and animals too.
This summer season is marked on one side by the extreme heat conditions, while on the other side there is both happiness and sadness. After completing our exams, we are in a state of anxiety until the announcement of the results. Now, CBSE and the other boards have declared their results and I would like to congratulate each and every student who has passed with flying colours. I came to know the significance of Mann ki Baat when many students, after obtaining their exam results, informed me that they listened carefully to my words on Mann ki Baat and followed them strictly during their exams, which has in turn proven to be quite fruitful and beneficial. Well Friends, I am glad to know this through your letters. However, the true reason behind your success is not any Mann ki Baat, but your hard work throughout the year and the consistent support from your entire family. Your school, your teachers and many others have a role to play in your success, and you have strived hard to attain this success, in order to meet everybody’s expectations. Mann ki Baat is a kind of exam tip given before entering the examination hall. However, today I really enjoy the fact that Mann ki Baat has created a significant impact, and I am very happy about it. While I speak about happiness surrounding our friends, who have passed with good scores, I would also like to make a mention of many of our friends who may have got low scores and some of them who were not successful. To all those who have passed, I would like to remind them that they are in that stage of their lives where they can choose their career in the right direction. Now, you have the opportunity to decide that right path for your career according to your wish and capabilities. Please also remember that your future will depend on the path which you choose. Generally, I have observed that most of the students have no idea about what they should study, why they need to study, or where they should study. They are also not aware of the aims in their lives. Many students mostly choose their career paths based on the opinions of their friends and families or based on the wishes of their parents. Our universe has expanded itself in all directions. There are no limits for the choice of subjects or opportunities. You must be careful and determined in choosing your career path, in accordance with your talent and capabilities. Why do you always have to choose the prevailing opportunities? Try your best. Try to utilise the talents within you to gain new opportunities. At the same time, you should also think how you can contribute to the betterment of your nation from what you have learned or what you become.
You will be shocked to hear about the fact that, as compared to the number of museums built around the world, the number of museums in India is very few. It is very difficult to find the right staff members for these museums as it is not a conventionally popular field. I do not want to drag on one topic. However, my only point is that our nation is in dire need of excellent teachers, soldiers, scientists, as well as artists and musicians. The field of sports is very broad, wherein other than players, various eminent human resources are also required for the fulfilment of any sports activity. This proves that we are surrounded by a vast variety of fields and opportunities on this planet. We all must try with strong determination. Your strengths, your capabilities, your dreams – all should be aligned to the dreams of our nation. This is your only chance to choose your right path.
To those who have not succeeded, I would like to tell them that success or failure is part of life. Those who consider failure as an opportunity, always head towards the foundation of success. Those who give up in life, due to failure, can never reach the heights of success. We can learn a lot from our failures. Why not we believe that our failures can provide us the opportunity to know ourselves better and understand our strengths, and by knowing our strengths and talents, we will be able to choose the right path in life.
I am reminded of our nation’s ex-President, Shri A. P. J. Abdul Kalam. In his book “My Journey- Transforming dreams into Action”, he has mentioned an incident that took place in his life. He says that he always aspired to become a pilot. However, when he tried to become a pilot, he failed and could not clear his exams. Now, you can see that his failure gave him a great opportunity in his life. He became a great scientist of our nation. He became the President of India and his contribution stands unparalleled in the field of nuclear energy in India. Therefore, friends, please do not bend yourselves under the burden of failure. Failure is a kind of opportunity. Do not let the failure go without learning a lesson from it. Try to search for a hope and opportunity that lies hidden in your failure. This is my humble request to all my young friends, and also to their family members – if your son fails, please do not create an atmosphere which can force him to lose all hopes in his life. Sometimes, the children’s failure is associated with their parents’ dream which leads to various problems in future. It should not happen. Fighting with failures can provide us the strength to live our lives peacefully. I would once again like to congratulate all my young friends who have passed out with flying colours. I would also like to convey my thoughts to my young friends who have failed, but I congratulate them to have obtained opportunities to find a right path in their lives. Please try and strive to move forward with hope and trust in your lives.
Meanwhile, many incidents have happened since my previous Mann ki Baat. Our government has completed one year. The entire nation analysed us quite minutely and criticised us. Many people gave us a distinction for our governance. In democracy, I believe that it is very important to receive the feedback from the supporters and the opposition, in politics. We must try to understand the drawbacks and the areas where we lag behind. It is also beneficial to understand our merits.
In my case, I am happy with all that has happened so far. My heart is always yearning to do something for the poor people in our country. I always think of novel ideas and accept suggestions from others in order to help the poor. Last month, we launched 3 key policies to provide social security to the people of our society, i.e. Prime Minister’s Suraksha Bima Yojna, Prime Minister’s Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojna, and Atal Pension Yojna. It has been just twenty days since the launch of these policies, and I can proudly say that due to your trust in our nation, our government and our programmes and policies, the common citizens of our country have joined hands with us in such huge numbers. I am extremely happy in sharing the fact that within a short span of 20 days, more than 8 crore and 52 lakhs people have registered their names for these programmes. We have adopted important measures in the path of social security and it will act as a boon for the people in the future years.
For those who have not yet received this information, I would like to request them to acquire these benefits as soon as possible. No one could have imagined receiving Suraksha Bima Yojna by investing just one rupee per month or 12 rupees in a year. In order to get the benefits of Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojna, you need to invest just 330 rupees in a year, which is less than a rupee per day. Therefore, by using these benefits, the poor will not be dependent on others for their living. The poor will become independent and self-confident. We are adopting different measures in this direction. I want to create an army of people, my army comprising of poor people will fight against poverty and defeat it. Our nation has been burdened with poverty for years now, and we will take appropriate steps to try and eliminate poverty from our nation. We are sure we will succeed.
Another most important development is the introduction of a channel for farmers on television, and I am feeling happy about it. We have a number of channels on televisions in our country, such as cartoon channels, sports channels, news channels and entertainment channels. For me, the channel for farmers is very important as I can clearly see the future of farmers through this channel.
According to my view, this channel is like an open university for farmers and their farms. This is a channel where both students and teachers are farmers. These farmers can learn a lot of things through excellent experience and move from traditional farming towards modern farming. Only minimal areas are left for farming. The families of farmers are increasing in number, but the land area is reducing. Due to this problem, it is very critical to understand the ways to grow crops efficiently, in such small areas. Now, we can get details about the weather forecast and plan accordingly. The channels for farmers will be focussing on these various issues. My farmer brothers and sisters, a system for monitoring farmers has been arranged in each of our districts. Please contact the respective district heads for availing this benefit.
I would like to speak to my fisherman brothers and sisters, to all those who are involved with fishery. There are many things for them to learn from this channel. In India, animal husbandry has been a traditional segment in a villager’s life, which acts as a supportive role in farming. However, as compared to the number of animals and the amount of milk production in various countries around the world, India lacks far behind. As compared to the numbers of animals, the estimated amount of milk production is not achieved in our country. The process by which we can produce more milk per animal, the ways in which the animals can be taken care of and the types of food that should be provided to them, are some the important factors to be considered. We take various measures based on our traditions, but we need to move forward by adopting scientific methods and technologies. By adopting these scientific methods, farmers as well as the animal husbandry can help us achieve financial strength. In this way we can provide confidence and power to the farmers and also the animal keepers. We should get scientific guidance regarding the direction in which we should move forward and attain success in this area.
My dear countrymen! Do you remember this date, 21st June? Generally, 21st June is remembered as the longest day of the year. But, recently this date has gained a new significance in the world. In September, last year, I had raised a subject and proposed to celebrate 21st June as International Yoga day while addressing the United Nations Assembly. The whole world was astonished, and you will also be surprised to know that within hundred days, we got support from 177 countries and this proposal was successfully passed. In the history of United Nations, such huge numbers of supporters from different countries were seen for the first time. This proposal was passed in a very short span of time, with the support of various countries around the world. This is a proud moment for every Indian.
Now, this is our responsibility. Would we have ever thought that Yoga can act as a connecting link between nations? Vasudhaiv Kutumbakam implies that our ancestors had imagined the same, where Yoga will act as a catalyst in connecting the world. This is news of utmost happiness and pride for us. But to achieve its real significance, we need to project the real essence of Yoga, and its real strength, to the entire world. Yoga connects the heart and mind and acts as a medium for freedom from ailments and lust. I am realizing that Yoga connects the body, mind and knowledge. Now, it is has been widely proven that Yoga can also act as a medium for connecting the world.
Why are we not taking steps to become an ambassador for this venture? Why not move forward in this path of human development with the help of this vital knowledge of Yoga? We must celebrate 21st June as Yoga day, in every corner of India. Please call up your relatives and friends staying in different parts of the world and ask them to gather in groups and celebrate Yoga day. If they have no knowledge of Yoga, ask them to take help from books. Read and explain the importance of Yoga in our lives. You can also read various letters on Yoga. I strongly believe that by declaring Yoga day, we have taken an important step in the development of the world. We have contributed to human development by removing stress from the lives of people, by providing positive energy to those who have lost all hopes in their lives. I want that what world has accepted, what world has respected, and what world has given to India should be a matter of pride, three weeks are left and you should take efforts and join and make others join.
I would especially like to speak to my soldiers of the army, who are fighting for our country’s safety. They have joined the army for their living and have sacrificed their lives for our country. Here, I am not speaking to them as a Prime Minister, but from my inner self, inner truth and deep emotions that I have for my soldiers.
Questions about one-rank and one-pension have not been resolved or answered for over forty years. There is no denial from the truth that the previous governments have spoken about this issue, but have never done something about it. I can assure you, and I have also promised my army men, that my government will surely launch one-rank and one-pension. We know our responsibilities, and after the formation of our government, different departments have begun working on this issue. I used to consider this to be a simple issue, but it is far more complicated than I thought, and for forty years this issue has been delayed. In order to resolve this issue in a simpler direction, I have asked the government officials to find solutions to this problem. It is not necessary to provide information to media every single second. There is no requirement to run a commentary for this issue. I would like to assure you, and I would like to repeat, that our government will launch one-rank and one-Pension and provide solutions to all related issues. Your life is very important to us, owing to the thought-process and ideals, with which we are moving forward.
I would like to connect with you and help you, not just as a part of any government programme, or any political campaign, but as a reflection of my patriotism. I, once again would like to convey to all the soldiers of my country, that we are not one of those people, who, in the name of politics, played games with you for the past forty years. I am against this path, and I am not willing to take any step which would complicate the existing issues. I want you to trust me, even if people are talking against us and playing games in the name of politics. I would like to provide all the assistance to my people who are sacrificing their lives for the country. These are my motives, and I believe that the words from my soul, which is made up of nothing but truth, will touch your heart as well. You have kept your patience intact for forty years. I need some time and opportunity to work. Once again, I would like to assure my countrymen that we will mutually work on this issue and find solutions for the same.
You all must have visited different parts of the country during vacations. Some of you must be planning now to visit places. It is natural that “Seeing is Believing”. When we visit places, we may go to our relatives’ place or go sight-seeing. We get to explore and understand the world. For a person, who has just seen a pond in his village, the experience of seeing an ocean cannot be expressed in words. He is unable to describe the size of ocean in front of the villagers, as seeing is altogether a different experience. When in vacations while you are travelling, with friends or family or planning to go, I do not know if you have the habit of writing a diary while travelling. I believe you must jot down your experiences when you meet new people and, you should write down in words all that influenced you. When you see something, you should describe it in words. In other words, you must assimilate what you see or feel, within you. Travelling is a form of knowledge in itself. It is not possible for all of us to get a chance to climb the Himalayas. One must read the adventurous travel stories through the books written by those who have got a chance to visit the Himalayas.
I am not saying that you should become a writer. We should travel and write to learn something new, to understand our country, and to know its varied diversity. We can write about a particular place, the food-habits of the people there, their clothing style, language, and culture, and also about their dreams, aspirations and problems. We are living in this vast nation. If we want to understand the entire nation, one life is not enough to do this. It is my earnest request to all of you, who are planning to visit or travel, to share your travelling experiences with me. I would be glad to read your stories. I would request you to mail me your photo and your experience with Incredible India#, and I will share your impressive stories with others.
I would like to feel what you have experienced. I would to like see from far, what you have seen during your travel. You can visit a sea shore and take a walk alone. Though I may be unable to do this, by reading your story, I would love to share your vivid experience with others.
On this note, let me remind you once again, please take care of yourself and do not fall sick. There are many ways to protect yourself from the summer heat, but please take care of the birds and animals around you too. I have spoken all that came out of my heart. I will meet you all again, and will speak again. My heartfelt greetings to one and all.
Thank you all for your support.
10. JUNE 28, 2015
Namaskar, My Dear Countrymen!
Last time in Mann ki Baat I had requested you to send me memorable pictures if you go out on a vacation anywhere in India and if you happen to find them, kindly post them under the ‘Incredible India’ hashtag. When Isaid that, I had never imagined that it would get such an immense response. Lakhs of people have posted photos on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. I can say that India is full of diversities and I was able to witness so many magnificent scenes in those pictures; be it of architecture, art, nature, waterfalls, mountains, rivers or seas. Government of India had never thought that in terms of tourism you all could contribute in such a massive way. I liked some pictures so much that I re-tweeted them. And as I understand, if some one would not have posted the picture of Belum caves in Andhra Pradesh many people would have never come to know that something like that exists in our country. Madhya Pradesh’s Orcha Fort is another example of that. We assume Rajasthan to be a state with scarcity of water, but when someone sends a photo of Menal waterfall, it is a matter of great surprise. Really, a tremendous work has been done. We will promote and also continue doing such work and the entire world will watch it, entire nation will watch it and our new generation will also watch it.
My beloved countrymen, though you have elected me as the Prime Minister of the country but at times, the human in me shuns all posts and prestige associated with it and submerges oneself within it. I can say that 21st June, the International Yoga Day affected me in the same manner. At that time, when I proposed the International Yoga Day, it was just an idea. But the scene that was witnessed on 21st June was such that wherever the sun dawned, wherever its rays reached, there was not a single landmass wherein it was not welcomed by way of Yoga. We can say with conviction that the sun never sets in the world of Yoga practitioners.
The way Yoga was received and was welcomed with open arms around the world, there would not be any Indian who would not be proud of it. I too got delighted. And when the people of France chose River Seine and Eiffel Tower in which they take pride to do Yoga, they gave an equal status to it as River Siene and Eifel Tower. In New York people did yoga at Times Square. If we think about Sydney, Australia then the picture of Opera House comes to our mind. The citizens of Australia gave equal respect to yoga and did yoga at the Opera House. Whether it is North America, Silicon Valley or Milan’s Duomo Cathedral it is a matter of great pride for us. On 21st June when I saw Mr. Ban Ki-Moon, UN Secretary General doing yoga at UN Headquarters, I was really delighted. Similarly, UN Peace Keeping Force did a spectacular display of Yoga. In India, our soldiers too were doing yoga in Siachen on white sheet of snow and on sea too, wherever our naval ships are posted, the yoga program was being carried out by Indian Navy. Delhi made it to the Guinness Book of World Records . Rajpath turned into the Yogpath that day. I am thankful to India and the rest of the world and can say that the International Yoga Day was not for namesake. It seemed as if that from every corner of the world, there was a new inquisitiveness, new joy, new hope and new connection.
Few days back, when I tweeted a photo of a Vietnamese child doing yoga, it was such a sweet photo that it got a lot of attention from the entire world. Everybody, be it men-women, old-young, village-city, developed or developing countries, everybody got connected with it. Yoga in true terms, became the core reason to connect the entire world. I do not know how the intellectual class, elites of the world would analyze this event. But I can feel and every Indian can experience that the whole world is very curious to know more about India. Curiosity towards India has increased. The world wants to know about the values, the rituals and the heritage of India. It is our responsibility that without any artificiality we share our legacy and introduce ourselves to the world. We can only do this when we ourselves are proud of our traditions.
At times, we are so familiar with our values that we don’t feel there is anything new in them but we ourselves do not know that our family values are considered to be a big thing in the entire world. Why don’t we familiarize the outside world with our family values? The world would be very surprised to know about them. I am sure, they would be intrigued. There are many things that our forefathers have given to us which are the best and the entire world also has the right on those things. The success of International Yoga day has brought in a new responsibility along with it. It is our responsibility that we gift supreme Yoga teachers to the world. It is our responsibility that we can see the entire tradition of Yoga on one platform from the Universe.
I request the youngsters, especially the IT professionals, that all of you should come together to create an Online Yoga Activity program. We all should come to know about all the Yoga organizations, Yoga teachers and all the necessary information about the Yoga from this online program. One database must be prepared and I believe you can do it. One must start from somewhere and it would surely turn out to be a great power. I have seen and learnt from the perspective of recent occurrences that a government that works and the government that is action-oriented can bring in results if the targets are set. We should not forget that the only voice that could be heard one year ago was that nothing happens, nothing happens, nothing happens.
Can you imagine that there is a department under Government named Ayush. Nobody has paid attention towards this department. The only mention Ayush in some corner of the newspaper being a small department is once in 2 to 5 years. But it led on the International Yoga Day. It was this small department that organized this event in the entire world. Therefore, this is an example that if there is an aim then even a small department can do a supreme job.
In the last few days, the world saw how we saved people from Yemen to Afghanistan. In a few hours-, we reached Nepal and helped people over there. When people wanted to open an bank account under the Government’s new scheme of Jan Dhan Yojana, how the people working in bank helped them to do so and connected millions of Indians to the bank.
On 15th August last year, when I appealed from the Red Fort for toilets in schools, I had said that by next 15th August we have to complete this task. The work which could not be completed in last 60 years was promised to be completed by the end of one year. The promise was really daring. Almost four and half lakh toilets were to be built but I can say it with satisfaction that though 15th August is still far off, the work of constructing toilets by the people is on the verge of completion.
This means that the Government, people and Government workers, all want to work for the country. If we pledge to work in an unselfish manner “Welfare for All, Happiness for All” then the Government will also work efficiently. The people who are a part of the government will also work efficiently and the people of the nation will welcome them with open arms.
I have experienced this. This is the true strength that drives a nation forward. Last month, we had launched three Insurance schemes. I had launched them from Kolkata and it has received such a commendable response in such a short span of time. There have been very few steps which have been taken from the perspective of social security but by way of these three schemes we are taking a big leap. In such a short time span more than 10 crore people have become a part of these schemes but we have to take it further. I have a thought which I want to put forth before you. Rakshabandhan comes in the month of August. Can’t we start a massive movement before this festival and make every women, be it our mother or sister, a part of this, thereby giving benefit to them under this Insurance program. Be it a sister who is a domestic help in your home or your own sister why can’t we gift them a Rs. 12 or Rs. 330 scheme on Rakshabandhan for their entire life. This can be a big gift for a sister from their brother. Why can’t we set the eve of rakshabandhan as a target and in a number of 2 crore, 5 crore, 7 crore and 10 crore … try to reach the sisters so that they can reap the benefit of this scheme. Let’s come together and try to work together towards the completion of this pledge.
Whenever I hold a Mann ki Baat session, many people send me suggestions. This time many people have suggested that I say something about the monsoons. Yogesh Dandekar from Nagpur, Harshvardhan ji from Mysore, Praveen Nadkarni ji, Divyanshu Gupta ji have all asked me to say something about the monsoon in this session of Mann ki Baat. They have sent in some really good suggestions. And this is a season of happiness. And each one of us, whatever the age is… definitely tempted to enjoy the first showers of the monsoon. I am sure, you too might be enjoying the rains with bhajiyas, pakoras, corn and a hot cup of tea. Just as the rays of the sun give us life, similarly rainfall provide us life and sustenance. Every drop of water is precious. As a responsible citizen and as a member of the society, we will have to cultivate the habit of conserving every drop of water. It should be our pledge that water from the villages stays in the villages and water for the cities remains available for them. If the rain water does not flow away, it goes into the earth , then the aquifers get recharged and the year long water woes get resolved. Rain water harvesting is not a new concept. It is being practiced over the centuries. Be it check dams, watershed development, small lakes or the small ponds in fields, we need to save the precious waters everywhere. I always tell people, that if you go to Porbander, the birth place of Mahatma Gandhi, you will be able to see a two hundred year old underground water tank which got directly recharged with the rain water. You can still see it. If you ever go there, do visit the place. And you will find that even after two hundred years it is still functional, brimming with water and the water does not even stagnate. Porbander is a coastal city, so potable water was collected through the rains for the entire year. Even in those times such a lot of care was taken. We can too do the same. This should in fact become a mass movement. Each and every village should have the facilities for rain water harvesting.
Similarly, we find greenery so pleasing to our eyes. We all like greener surroundings. Gardens and trees bring in an element of freshness in our lives. This monsoon season, there should be mass plant sowing campaigns conducted by youth and social organizations. And I can take a leaf from my personal experience and offer you a suggestion which has been very successful. This is an intensely rural technology. Whenever you sow a plant, place an earthen pot near it. You just need to fill it once or twice in a month. You will see how fast the plant grows into a lush green tree. I have even been telling the farmers to plant trees on the boundaries of their fields instead of putting barricades. These will become your biggest asset in the long run.
It is true that rains are enjoyable and bring in a lot of fun at the same time. It is also true that rains also bring in many diseases. Doctors get to see so many patients that they hardly get the time to breathe. We all know that rains cause many water borne diseases. Increased moisture in the environment leads to bacterial growth and so, keeping the environment clean becomes important. Cleanliness is very important in monsoons. It is often requested to consume safe drinking water. Most of the people boil and drink water during this season. It has its own benefits. And this is true that the more care we take, healthier we would be. We need monsoons and we need water but we also need to stay healthy.
Dear citizens, we have recently launched three schemes for the people in the cities. We have around 500 small cities. Our policy is ‘Waste to Wealth’. We can earn from waste too. Garbage can be recycled to make fertilizers, bricks and even electricity. Contaminated water can be recycled to make it clent and be used for irrigation in the fields. We have to take this movement forward.
In the Amrut scheme, we have launched a massive campaign and taken up initiatives to improve the quality of life in our cities. We should become a country which is able to match the living standards of the world. We should have smart cities, comparable to world standards. And yet at the same time, the poorest of poor person should have an accommodation of his own and that too complete with water, electricity, sanitation and access to a school. In 2022 when India celebrates its 75 years of Independence, we wish that every Indian has a house of his own. Keeping all this in mind, we have launched three major schemes. I am positive that these schemes will bring about a qualitative difference in the lives of the urban people.
I am myself connected to you via the social media. I keep getting many new suggestions and new ideas and also good and bad information about our government. And sometimes it so happens that a small comment from an individual in some remote village in India conveys something that just touches our hearts. You are aware that the government has launched “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” programme. But you can’t imagine the force that is lent to the programme when a village or a society adopts it. A few days back a Sarpanch in a small remote village of Haryana, Sri Sunil Jaglan ji launched ‘Selfie with Daughter’ campaign. Such an environment was created that every father wished to click a selfie of himself with his daughter and post it on the social media.
I liked this idea, and that too for a special reason. In Haryana, the number of girls in comparison to boys is dismally low. Around another 100 districts in the country have a similar dismal situation of skewed sex ratio. But it is the worst in Haryana. In that very same Haryana, if a Sarpanch of a small indistinct village lends this meaning to the “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” programme, then I certainly get overwhelmed. It makes me so happy and it gives me a new hope and I do express my happiness. I request you all to take a selfie with your daughter and post it on #selfie with daughter. And do not forget to post a tagline around the theme of “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” with it, whatever be the language it can be in Hindi, English, your mother tongue or your native language. And I promise to re-tweet the most inspirational tagline with you and your daughter’s selfie. We can turn “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” into a mass movement. I urge you all to take forward the programme launched by Sri Sunil in Bibipur village of Haryana. I request you all to post on #selfie with daughter. Lets us all enjoy the rising honour and prestige of our daughters and see how joyful this entire experience of “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” becomes. Let us all rid ourselves of this bad name that we have for not respecting our daughters.
So my best wishes to you for the coming monsoon season. May all of you enjoy the rains. Make our country clean and green. And remember, the International Yoga day was not a single day initiative. Continue practicing Yoga, then see what difference it makes to you and your life. And I say this from my experience. Please take this forward. Make Yoga a part of your life. And that initiative regarding Incredible India, do keep posting a picture of whichever part of the country you go to. The country and the world will awaken to our diversity. I felt that the handicrafts did not receive due attention. Do make it a point to post the handicrafts of the local region you visit. There are so many things that people around you might be making, the poor as well as the skilled might be creating. Do keep posting their pictures regularly. We have to expand our reach to the world and make India known to the world. We have an easy medium at our disposal and so we will all do it.
My dear countrymen, that is all for today. I shall meet you again in the next edition of Mann ki Baat. Many people expect me to announce some huge schemes during this programme. But I am working day and night towards those. This is my time for some light conversation with you all. This gives me immense pleasure.
Thank You Very Much!
11.  July 26, 2015
My Dear Countrymen, Namaskar!
This year the rains have started on a good note. This will definitely prove beneficial to our farmer brothers and sisters in sowing of kharif crops. I am very pleased to share an immensely good news with you all. We have always faced scarcity of pulses and oilseeds in our country. Poor people require pulses and some amount of oil to prepare vegetables for their food. The good news for me is that there has been an increase of approximately 50% in the production of pulses and an increase of around 33% in the production of oilseeds. I would especially like to congratulate and compliment all my farmer brothers and sisters for this achievement.
My dear countrymen, 26th July is marked as Kargil Vijay Diwas in the history of our country. The intensity with which the farmers are connected with their land, our soldiers too are connected with the land in the same degree. During the Kargil war, each one of our soldier proved mightier than hundreds of soldiers of our enemies. I would like to salute all our brave soldiers who thwarted the attempts by our enemies without caring for their lives. Kargil war was not limited to just our borders, but each of our cities, villages contributed in this war. This war was fought by those mothers and sisters whose sons and brothers were fighting against the enemies at the border. This war was also fought by the daughters of our country, who were newly married and their henna were still fresh on their hands. Also, by the proud fathers, who saw themselves as soldiers, seeing their sons fighting for the country, and also by that infant who had not even learnt to walk catching his father’s fingers. It is because of these unmatchable sacrifices that our country is proudly standing on its feet in front of the entire world. Hence, I would like to salute all these valiant warriors on this occasion of Kargil Vijay Diwas.
There is another reason why I consider 26th July quite important because MyGov.in was launched a few months after our government was formed. Our pledge was to promote citizen participation in democracy and connect every citizen in the development work. And today I am pleased to share this after one year that nearly two crore people have visited MyGov website. We have received comments from five and a half lac people and I am extremely glad to mention that more than fifty thousand people took out time from their precious schedule to apply their mind and provide their suggestions on PMO applications as they considered this work important. And we have received quite significant suggestions. One of the suggestions sent from Mr. Akhilesh Vajpayee from Kanpur is to provide separate quota to the disabled for booking tickets on IRCTC website. It is quite unfair that the disabled citizens have to go through the same tiring procedure and buy tickets at the railway station. Though this is a very minor issue but the government never took note of it or thought about the same previously. But on the suggestion of our brother Akhilesh Vajpayee, our government looked into this suggestion seriously and we have implemented this facility in our system for our disabled brothers and sisters. We are receiving quite positive suggestions on MyGov, it is helping in getting assistance in creating logos, tag-lines and formulating policies by yourselves. We are experiencing fresh air in the administrative system. We are experiencing a new sense of consciousness. I am even receiving suggestion on MyGov that what should be my speech on 15th of August.
We have received quite a few suggestions from Suchitra Raghavachari from Chennai in this regard. She has suggested me to speak on the topics like Save our Daughters, Educate a Girl Child, Clean Ganges, Swachh Bharat. With this I got an idea and I am requesting you all to send suggestions about what should be the topics for my 15th August speech. You can send in your suggestions through MyGov, letters to Radio or write letters to the PM’s office. Look, I believe that this will be a great initiative to include people’s suggestion in framing my speech for 15th August. I believe that you will send your good suggestions.
I would like to talk about an issue which is a matter of great concern. I neither want to sermonize nor I am trying to find an escape route towards my responsibilities pertaining to state government, central government or units of local self-government institutions.
Two days ago a visual of an accident in Delhi caught my attention, wherein the victim on scooter was fighting for his life for ten minutes post the accident. He did not receive any help from the passers-by. In general also I have noticed that I have been receiving suggestions to speak on road safety and make the people aware of this. Be it Hoshakote Akshay from Bengaluru, Ameya Joshi from Pune or Prasanna Kakunje from Mudbidri, Karnataka – all these all people have written to me… there are many other names which I am not being able to mention and have raised their concerns. I agree that whatever you have put forth is valid.
My heart shivers when I look at the statistics of accidents. We are witnessing an accident every minute in our country. Due to these road accidents we are witnessing one death every four minutes in our country. It is a matter of huge concern that out of these deaths, nearly one third of the victims comprise the youth ranging from 15 to 25 years of age group, and such death shakes the very foundation of an entire family. The government system will continue to work towards this but I would like to request all the parents to make their children aware of all the Safety Rules pertaining to driving a two-wheeler or a four-wheeler – the families should encourage discussion of road safety at home and create an atmosphere about the same to promote road safety. We have seen few lines written at the back of auto-rickshaws, “Papa, come home early” and after reading it we are so touched by it. And therefore I say that the government has taken a lot of new initiatives in this regard, be it the initiative of education on Road Safety, initiative related to road engineering or of enforcement of road safety laws and the discussion on Emergency Care to be provided post accidents. We are going to implement Road Transport and Safety Bill to adopt these safety measures in our country. In the coming days, we are also planning to take many important measures for implementing National Road Safety Policy and Road Safety Action Plan.
We have undertaken another project called Cashless Treatment in Gurgaon, Jaipur and Vadodara to Mumbai, Ranchi, Rangaon and Mundiya national highway and it will be further extended. The Cashless Treatment refers to the policy for the first fifty hours post-accident – one need worry if one has money or not, who will pay the bills, leaving all this worry – one has to give primary importance to the road accident victim who is injured so that he is treated and provided the best hospital facilities at the earliest. We have started a toll-free number 1033 for providing information about incidents across the country and ambulance service but all these are services are for post accidents. One must strive to avoid accidents first but it is also important for us to see from the perspective that each and every soul, each and every life is precious.
Sometimes I say that the government employees to be Karma Yogis or selfless workers. I recalled a few incidents in the last few days which I liked and hence would like to share with you. Sometimes people get tired of their continuous jobs. In the initial few years the attitude is “okay, I get my salary so I will work”. However, I came across an incident of a railway department a few days ago, wherein a railway TTE Vijay Biswal from Nagpur division who is gifted with painting prowess could have has chosen to showcase his skills related to any field but he continues to work with the railways and paints various scenes related to railways only. Through this he gets an inner satisfaction for his job and also enjoys his hobby at the same time. Using his example, we can learn how to bring more life to our own jobs. Vijay Biswal has shown us how we can connect our jobs with our hobbies, interests or skills. Who knows, Vijay Biswal’s work may get recognised by his paintings across the nation in the near future.
I have come to know about a very inspiring work started by the entire team of government officials in Harda district, Madhya Pradesh. These bunch of officials with their entire team have started such a work which has touched me immensely and I really liked it – and the work they have started is ‘Operation Malyuddh’, and upon hearing this you will feel that this subject will go in a certain direction. But the key focus of this operation is to give a new direction to Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan. They are working on ‘Brother Number One’ operation in which the best brother has to gift one toilet to his sister. On the occasion of Raksha Bandhan, they are influencing all the brothers to gift toilet to their sisters, so that all the mothers and sisters of the district avoid going to toilet in the open. This operation has given a new meaning to Raksha Bandhan and I would like to congratulate the entire government team of Harda district for this initiative.
I came across a news a few days back and these small news really gives me immense pleasure and I would like to share the same with you. There exists a small village called Keshla in Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh. The inhabitants of this village from last few months tried and lead a campaign for building toilets in the village. Now, nobody from this village has to go to toilet in the open. After the completion of this campaign, the entire village celebrated this accomplishment just like a mega festival. These finest examples coming up to me show how our society is bringing change in human values and human mind and how the citizens of this country are taking the nation forward.
Bhavesh Deka from Guwahati has written to me on the North-East related issues and problems. I must say that North-East people are quite active. I really appreciate that they write about a lot of issues. I would like to tell them with great pleasure that we have a separate ministry for North-Eastern region. During the government of Atal Bihari Vajpayee as our Prime Minister, a DONER Ministry called “Development of North-East Region” was formed. After our government was formed, the DONER Department took an important decision of not staying in Delhi and working from centre for the North-East regions? Instead it was decided to send the government officials and their team on a seven days camp to North-East states like Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura, Assam and Sikkim. These officials would visit the districts, villages and meet the local government officials and talk to people’s representatives and the citizens of those regions. They will listen to their problems and direct the government in taking appropriate measures in solving those problems. This initiative will bring a fruitful result in the near future. The officials who will visit these states would realize the beauty of these states and will feel very determined to work for the development of these states and to fix the problems of these states. When they return with this pledge, they can easily understand the problems of these states even when they reach Delhi. This is a great initiative to go far-off from Delhi to East, and this act is called “Act East Policy”.
My dear countrymen, we are extremely delighted and proud of the “Mars Mission” success. India’s PSLV C-28 has launched five UK satellites, which are the heaviest satellites launched by India till date. Such news remain in the flashlight for few moments and are gone. We often do not remember these achievements for a long time. I am often worried by this thought that we speak to the youth of our nation and ask about their dream job, only one out of 100 would express their interest in becoming a scientist. Youth is losing their interest in science, which is a matter of great concern.
Science and Technology is a type of DNA for development. The youth of our country should dream about becoming a scientist and imbibe interests in the field of research and innovation. Their capabilities should be monitored and must be assisted in the right direction to achieve success in this field. Ministry of Human Resource Development, Govt. of India has initiated a National Discovery Campaign. It was inaugurated by India’s ex-President Dr. A.P.J Abdul Kalam. As a part of this campaign, IIT, NIT, Central and State Universities being their mentor and guide are going to educate and motivate the aspiring students to choose the right path in their career. I always press upon the IAS officers of our government, who have reached such heights with their vast intellect and education that they should visit the nearby schools and colleges and share their knowledge for just two to four hours in a week. Your experience and intellect would certainly help the new generation to some extent.
We have raised a very big issue regarding the supply of 24 hours electricity in the villages of our country. This work is difficult but it must be done. We have auspiciously inaugurated this scheme and the villages will get a supply of 24 hours electricity in the coming years. The students of the villages should not be affected with the shortage of electricity during their exams. There should be enough electricity for starting a small industry. Today, the villagers have to go to other villagers for charging their mobile phones. The villages should be provided with all the facilities that are available in the cities. For this purpose, we have launched “Deendayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Programme”. I am aware that this country is quite vast and we have to reach the villages and far off corners of the country. We have to run for the development of the Poor. We will achieve this goal and it is already in progress. We will certainly achieve this. Today, through Mann ki Baat, I felt like expressing these myriad of thoughts.
In a way, in our country the months of August and September are the months for celebration of festivals. There are lots of festivals in these months. My greetings to all of you for the same. Please do send your suggestions for 15th August. Your opinions will really help me.
Thank you very much to you all!
11.  AUGUST 30, 2015
12. SEPTEMBER 20, 2015
13. OCTOBER 25, 2015
14. NOVEMBER 29, 2015
15. DECEMBER 27, 2015
16. JANUARY 31, 2016
My dear countrymen, this is my first Mann Ki Baat of 2016. Mann Ki Baat has bonded me with you all in such a way that any idea that comes to me, I feel like sharing with you. Yesterday, I went to pay homage to respected Bapu at Rajghat. Every year we pay tributes to the martyrs on this day. Observing 2 minutes silence at sharp 11 A.M. is an occasion to express our gratitude to great and brave men, sages and saints who have laid down their lives for the country. However if we see, there would be many among us who won’t have maintained this 2 minutes silence. Don’t you think that it should become a habit and we should take it up as a national responsibility? I know that this will not happen with just one Mann Ki Baat. However, I thought of sharing what I felt yesterday. And these are the thoughts that inspire us to live for the country. Imagine 125 crore Indians, observing silence for 2 minutes at 11 A.M. on January 30. You can imagine the kind of power this event may have. And it is true what our scriptures have said- “संगच्छध्वं संवदध्वं सं वो मनांसि जानताम” – “May you move in harmony, speak in one voice; let your minds be in agreement”. This is the true strength of a nation and the inspiration comes fom such events.
My dear countrymen, I was trying to understand the thought process of Sardar Patel a few days ago when some of his ideas grabbed my attention. With regards to khadi, Sardar Patel said, “the freedom of India lies in khadi, India’s culture also remains in khadi; non-violence, the ultimate religion that we believe in India, is also in khadi; and the farmers of India for whom you show so much of emotion, their welfare too lies in khadi”. Sardarji used simple language to put across his message in a clear way and he explained the importance of khadi in a proper way. Yesterday on 30th January during the occasion of death anniversary of respectful Bapu, I made an attempt to reach out to as many people associated with khadi and rural industries by writing letters to them. Well, as you knowBapu was a supporter of science, so I also used technology as a medium to reach these lakhs of brothers and sisters. Khadi has now become a symbol, it has a different identity. Now, khadi is becoming the centre of attraction for the young generation and has become a perfect solution for those who have an inclination for organic and holistic health care. Khadi has carved out a niche for itself in the fashion world. My greetings to the people associated with khadi for their earnest efforts to bring something new in khadi. Market has its own importance in the economy. In addition to the emotional value, it is important that khadi makes a mark in the market itself. When I told people that you have so many different types of garments, then you should have khadi as well. And now people are understanding that if they can’t become a person using khadi only, they can however have atleast one khadi in addition to the several garments in their closet. The Government organizations are witnessing a positive trend for khadi. You may recall, many years ago, khadi was used extensively in the government organizations. However, it slowly began fading out of the scene in the name of modernization and those associated with the Khadi industry were losing jobs. Khadi has the potential to provide employment to millions. Few days ago, Railway Ministry, Police Department, Indian Navy, Postal Department of Uttarakhand and many such government organizations took intiatives to promote the use of khadi. And I was told that, efforts from the government organizations will result in more work for people in this sector, will generate employment of additional 18 lakh man days to fulfill the requirements, serve the needs of the government, which in turn would be a big jump in itself. Respected Bapu was always aware and insistent of technological up-gradation and also remained in the forefront for the same. And this is why, with constant development, our ‘Charkha’ has arrived to where it is now. Running charkha with solar and linking solar energy with Charkha have become a successful experiment. It has made it more efficient, production is higher and there is an enhancement in quality of the yarn. I have received many letters especially on the solar charkha. Geeta Devi and Komal Devi from Dausa in Rajasthan, and Sadhna Devi from Nawada district in Bihar have written to me saying that slar charkhas has made remarkable changes in their lives. “Our income has doubled and there has been a rise in demand for our yarn”. All these things adds to enthusiasm. And on January 30, when we rememeber Respected Bapu, I repeat – atleast make it necessary to keep one khadi among many of your garments, and become an supporter for the same.
Fellow Citizens, we all celebrated the 26th January with a lot of zeal and enthusiasm. Braving the terror threats, citizens of our country showed courage and celebrated the Republic Day with pride and dignity. But some people came out with an out of the box thinking. I would like to emphasize that these innovations are worth paying attention, especially the experiments of Haryana and Gujarat. The two states selected the most educated girls from every village to do the flag hosting in government run schools in the states. Haryana and Gujarat gave importance to the girls, provided special importance to the educated girls. Beti Bachao Beti Padhao – they made an effort and sent a good message. I congratulate the imagination of these two states and also congratulate all those girls who got the opportunity to host the flag. Last year in Haryana something even unique happened, the families wherein a girl child was born was invited as special guest and given the seat in the first row as a VIP. This was a huge moment of pride in itself and I am happy for the fact that I started ‘Beti Bachao Beti Padhao’ from Haryana where as the sex-ratio worsened. The number of girl child went down in proportion to thousand males. It was a huge concern as social balance was in danger. And when I picked Haryana, many of our officers told me to do away with that, saying there was a huge negative atmosphere in the state. But I persisted and today I greet Haryana from the bottom of my heart for accepting this proposal and now the birth of girls is growing at a very rapid pace there. I truly welcome the change brought in the social life there.
In the last edition of Mann Ki Baat I talked about two things. First, why don’t we, being citizens, clean the statues of great personalities? We get very emotional to build statues, but get careless thereafter. And the second thing that I told was, when there is a Republic Day, how can we then put emphasis on duties and discuss it? There have been plenty of discussions on rights and will continue to happen. But there should also be discussions on the duties. I am happy that people from many places, social organizations, educational institutions, few saints came forward to clean the statues and their premises. It has been a good start, and this is not only a Swachta Abhiyan, it also is Samman Abhiyan. I am not mentioning about everyone here, but the news that has been received is highly satisfying. Few people perhaps do not give information due to hesitation. I urge all those people to send photos of the statues cleaned by them on the portal MyGov.in as people from around the world can see that and feel honored.
In the same way I asked for views on ‘Duties and Rights’ on January 26 and I am happy that thousands of people participated in it.
My dear countrymen, I need a help from you and I believe that you will come along with me.A lot is being said in the name of farmers in our country. Well, I don’t want to embroil into this controversy. However, the biggest crisis of farmers is the sheer waste of their efforts in the natural disaster. His year goes waste. There is only one solution that is to provide security to farmers and that is Fasal Beema Yojana. Government of India has given a very big gift to the farmers in 2016 – ‘Pradhan Mantri Fasal Beema Yojana’. But this is not meant to praise the scheme and the Prime Minister. Even though discussions have been happening on crop insurance for so many years, not more than 20-25 per cent of the farmers across the country have become its beneficiary and get connected with the same. Can we pledge to reach out to at least 50 percent of the country’s farmers with the crop insurance over the next 1-2 years. I need your help in this exercise. If a farmer gets linked to the crop insurance scheme, he gets a big help in the times of crisis. Let me tell you, Pradhan Mantri Fasal Beema Yojana has got a lot of public acceptance as it is very comprehensive, simple and with technological inputs. And not only this, even if something happens within 15 days of crop harvesting, even then assurances for support is provided. Focus has been on using the technology to fast track it and ensure there is no delay in receiving the insurance claims. On the top of it, the insurance premium rate has been slashed to its lowest level which no one would have ever thought of. In the new insurance scheme for the farmers, the maximum limit of premium would be 2 percent for kharif and 1.5 percent for the rabi crops. And tell me, if any of my farmer brothers is deprived of the scheme, then will it be damaging for him or not? You may not be a farmer, but must be listening to Mann ki Baat. Will you make my voice reach the farmers? And therefore I want that you promote it the most. And for this, I have also brought a new scheme. I want that my talks regarding Pradhan Mantri Fasal Beema Yojana reaches the masses. And it is right that you are listening to my Mann Ki Baat on TV and radio. But what if you have to listen to it later? Here is gift from my side, you can listen to my Mann Ki Baat on mobile phone at anytime. All you have to do is just give a missed call from your mobile phone. The number kept for Mann Ki Baat is 8190881908, eight one nine zero eight, eight one nine zero eight. Just give a missed call and you will be able to listen to Maan Ki Baat whenever you want to. As of now, it is in Hindi. But very soon, you would get the opportunity to listen to Mann Ki Baat in your mother tongue. I will arrange for this as well. My dear youngsters, you have done a commendable job. I experienced new energy, new consciousness, new zeal and new vigour during the start-up program, which was held on January 16. Lakhs of people had registered to attend this event. However due to space constraint, the program was eventually held in Vigyan Bhawan. Many of you couldn’t make it, but we ensured that you are able to participate in the event for the entire day online. It is rare to find that a program keeps lakhs of young people engaged for so many hours, but it happened. And I was a witness to the kind of excitement start-ups has. There is a misconception among the people that start-up means IT related talks, very sophisticated business. The start-up event cleared this misconception Let me tell you- Start-up around IT is a small part. Life is big, needs are endless. Start-up also brings innumerable opportunities.
I visited Sikkim few days ago. Sikkim has now become an organic state and I had invited the country’s agriculture ministers and secretaries there. I got the chance to meet two young individuals there who have studied from IIM. One is Anurag Agarwal and other is Sidhi Karnani. They have ventured towards start-up and met me in Sikkim. They work in agriculture field in North East and do the global marketing of herbal and organic produce. That’s a great job.
Last time, I told people associated with start-up to narrate their experiences and send it to me on ‘Narendra Modi App’. Many have sent, but I will be delighted if many more people come forward. Let me tell you, the narratives which I have received so far, are truly inspiring. There is young guy named, Vishwas Dwivedi He has an online kitchen start-up and he undertakes the work of transporting tiffins to the middle class people, who have gone out for jobs, through online networking. Then there is one Dignesh Pathak. He has made up his mind to work for the farmers, especially the animal feed. If our animals get good feed, then we will get good milk. And if we get good milk, then the young people of our country will be powerful. Manoj Gilda, Nikhilji have started agri-storage start-up. They are developing the bulk storage system for agricultural products with scientific fruits storage system. Means lots of suggestions have come. And you send more, I will feel good and if I have to talk about start-up repeatedly in my ‘Mann Ki Baat’ like I do every time for cleanliness, will do so for startups as well, as your power is our inspiration.
My dear countrymen, cleanliness is also getting associated with beauty. We kept expressing anguish against the filth for so many years, but it didn’t disappear. Now people of the country have started discussion on cleanliness, leaving behind the filth. And somewhere or the other, something or the other work is happening on cleanliness. But now, people have marched one step ahead in the initiative. They have added beauty with cleanliness. In a way, this is doubly beneficial, and it is especially seen at the railway stations. I see that many local people, local artists, students are engaged in decorating the railway stations of their cities. Keeping the local art at the centre, painting the walls, making artistic sign boards with content to keep people aware, and so many other things being undertaken by the people. Someone told me that the tribal women have decrorated the Hazaribagh station with the local Sohrai and Kohbar Art design. Over 300 volunteers of Thane district decorated the King Circle, Matunga, Borivali, Khar stations. Many news are coming from Rajasthan; Sawai Madhopur, Kota. It seems that our railway stations in themselves will become the identity of our tradition. Nobody will search tea and pakoda walas through the windows. Sitting on the train, on the walls one can see the specialty of the place. This was neither the initiative of the Railways nor Narendra Modi. This was the people’s initiative. See when people do, and how well they do. I see that I have got some pictures, but I want to see many more pictures. Can you, who have take some effort of cleaning along with decoration on railway station or other places, send me the pictures? Do send those. I will definitely see, people will also see and others will also get inspiration. And whatever can happen on the railway station, can happen on the bus station, hospitals, schools, near temples, churchs, mosques, gardens etc. Whoever brought this thought, started and promoted it, deserves a compliment. But yes, do send me the photos, I also want to see what you have done.
My dear countrymen, it is a matter of pride that India is hosting a major event from 4th to 8th of February. The entire world is coming and our navy is making a whole hearted effort to become a good host. Warships, naval ships of many countries are gathering at the coastal region of Vishakapatnam, Andhra Pradesh. International Fleet Review is happening on the coastal region of India. This is an effort to ensure rapport between us and world’s military power. This is a joint exercise. It is a very big opportunity. In the coming days, you will get to know about this through TV media as it will be a very big programme and everyone will emphasize on it. This is very important for a country like India, which has a golden coastal history. They say sea as Udhi or Sagar in Sanskrit. This means endless sufficency. Borders and land may be separating us, but water connects us, sea connects us. We can connect ourselves with sea, we can connect with anyone by sea. And our ancestors made the introduction of this power by roaming around the world, doing global trade. Be it Chatrapati Shivaji, Chola Dynasty which made a new identity with Naval power. Even today, there are many states where several cultures associated with sea exists and are celebrated with zest. When the world is becoming our guest, the power of the navy is getting introduced, this is a good opportunity. I will also get the fortune to be present on this global event.
In the similar way, South Asian Federation games involving SAARC nations is going to be held in Guwahati. Thousands of SAARC countries’ players are coming to the land of Guwahati. There is an atmosphere and excitement of sports. A grand celebration from the new generation of SAARC countries is happening on the land of Guwahati in Assam. This also is a good opportunity to make relations with the SAARC countries.
My dear countrymen, I had even said earlier that whatever comes to mind, I want to express it with you openly. Final Examinations for grade 10th and 12th will be conducted in the coming days. Last time I had shared my views with the students regarding the examinations. It is my wish that the students who have got the success share their experiences, how they have spent the tension-free days of examination, they can write to me regarding the atmosphere in family, roles played by teachers and elders, efforts made by them, any tips or suggestions and role played by the seniors. You must have had good experiences. This time you can send your experiences on Narendra Modi App. And I will request the media to promote the good things through their medium so that the students all over the country can read, watch on TV and appear in the exams in a tension-free atmosphere. I believe that media friends will definitely cooperate in this regard. Yes, but they will do only when you write to me. You will send, right? Please do send.
Many many thanks, friends. We will meet again for the next Mann Ki Baat next month. Many thanks.




17. FEBRUARY 28, 2016
My dear fellow citizens, Namaskar.
While listening to this month’s Mann Ki Baat, my inner thoughts, your mind must also be on your children’s exams which begin soon. Some of them have their 10th and 12th board exams starting from the 1st of March. That must be playing on your mind. I wish to be a part of this journey along with you. I am concerned about your children’s exams as much as you are, but I am not worried. If we were to change the way we look at exams then we would be tension-free.
When I shared my inner thoughts with you during last month’s Mann ki Baat, I had requested everybody to send their experiences and suggestions to me on Narendra Modi App. It makes me immensely happy that teachers and students who have had successful careers, as also parents and social thinkers, have shared their experiences and suggestions with me.
There are two things that have moved me. First, those who have written to me have a good grip on the subject; and, second, the sheer volume of the response to my request shows dealing with exams is an extremely important matter. Usually the issue of exams has largely remained confined to schools, teachers, students and their families. But the way suggestions have come pouring in through my App, it seems this should be a subject of constant discussion for the entire nation.
Today, during my Mann ki Baat, I would like to share my inner thoughts on exams with parents, students and teachers. I will share some of the things that I have heard, what I have read, and what I have been told. I will add my views on some exam-related issues about which I feel strongly. I am confident that students who will be appearing for exams will find what I have to say immensely useful to them. That’s how I feel about it.
My dear students, before I begin, why not let a well-known world opener make the opening comments about the things and experiences that helped him achieve heights of success in his life? That would definitely be useful for you. He is someone the young generation is proud of and inspired by — Bharat Ratna Sachin Tendulkar. He has sent a message that I will read out to you:
“Namaskar, I am Sachin Tendulkar speaking. I know that the 10th Board Exams are going to commence in a few days from now. Many of you are going to be tense about them. I have only one message for you all. Your parents, your teachers, your family members and your friends have a lot of expectations from you. Wherever you go, you will be asked ‘How are the preparations going? How many marks are you likely to score?’ I would like to say that you should set a target for yourself. Don’t come under the pressure of someone else’s expectations. You should definitely work hard but set a realistic and achievable target for yourself, and then try to achieve that target. When I used to play cricket, there were a lot of expectations from me as well. I faced a lot of difficult moments in these last 24 years and many a times there were good moments too. But people always had high expectations from me. As time passed, their expectations kept growing. So it was necessary for me to find a solution to this. That’s when I decided that I would set expectations for myself and set my own targets. If I set my own targets and I am able to achieve them, then I am sure to do something good for my country. And those were the targets that I would always try to achieve for myself. My focus would be on the ball, and slowly-slowly targets were achieved on their own. I would like to tell all of you that you must have a positive thinking. Positive results will follow. So you must be positive and God will surely give you good results. I am hopeful of that. My best wishes to you all. Please go write your exams, free from tension,and get good results. Good luck!”
Friends, you heard what Tendulkar-ji had to say. Don’t buckle under the pressure of expectations. It is you who have to shape your own future. So set your own targets for yourselves. Keep an open mind, think freely, and assess your own abilities. I am sure that what Sachin-ji has said will prove very helpful for you. Also, why should there be rivalry? Why not healthy competition? Why do we waste our time competing with others? Why don’t we compete with ourselves? Why don’t we decide to break our own previous record? If you were to do that, none would be able to stop you from moving ahead. When you break your own record, you will not have to depend on others for happiness and satisfaction. There will be a sense of inner satisfaction.
Friends, don’t look at exams as a game of numbers. “How much did I score, where did I score?” – don’t get trapped in this score-keeping. You should think of a greater purpose in life. You should have a dream to realise and a goal that you are committed to. Exams are there to only gauge whether we are going the right way or not, whether we are moving at the right speed or not. So, if our dreams are big and magnificent, exams will become a joyful experience. Each exam will then become just one more step towards realizing that dream; each success will turn into a key of realizing that goal. So don’t brood over what is going to happen in these exams this year. Have a large perspective and a goal, and move ahead. Once you do that, even if you achieve less than what you had expected, you will not be disappointed. Rather, it will give you the strength and confidence to try harder and better the next time.
Thousands of people have used their mobile phones to post small messages on my app. Shrey Gupta has stressed the point that a healthy mind resides in a healthy body only. Students should care for their health along with their studies so that they are able to write their exams well, in good health and spirit. On the last day before exams begin, I would not really urge you to start doing push-ups, get down on the field, or go for a 3 to 5 km walk. But one thing is for sure, especially during the days when examinations are held. And that is, your schedule matters. In any case, our daily schedule for all the 365 days in a year should be in line with achieving our dreams and goals.
I agree with the message posted by Shri Prabhakar Reddy — he has specially urged that one should go to sleep at a proper time and get up early in the morning to revise one’s preparation. One should arrive at the examination centre equipped with the admit-card and other things well before time. This is what Prabhakar Reddy has said, something which I would have perhaps dared not to say because I am not very particular when it comes to sleeping. My friends complain to me often that I sleep very little. This is my shortcoming which I will try to overcome.
I do agree that a fixed time to go to sleep and a sound sleep are as important as other activities during the day. This is possible. I am fortunate that although I sleep very less, I sleep very soundly and thus am able to manage with that little sleep. But I would like to request you all to get proper sleep. There are some who are in the habit of chatting over the phone for long hours before going to sleep. And then they ponder over things they chatted about. How can they get proper sleep? When I talk of sleep, please don’t think I am asking you to sleep at the cost of your preparation for the exams. At the time of exams, you should get a good sleep so that you are free from stress and tension. I am not saying that you should keep on sleeping. It should not be that you score low marks and when your mother asks you why you have fared so badly, you reply that it’s because Modiji had asked us to sleep, so I dozed off. I hope you will not do that. I am sure you won’t do anything like that.
Discipline plays a major role in laying the foundation of success in our lives. A strong foundation comes from discipline. Those who are un-organized and undisciplined, do those things in the evening that they should have done in the morning and then the work they had to do in the afternoon is done late at night. They might feel that their job is somehow done but it results in so much wastage of energy and they are also saddled with unnecessary tension each moment. You must have experienced that when one part of your body feels a little bit of pain, the entire body doesn’t feel well. Not just that, our entire routine collapses. So we should not view anything as trivial or unimportant. Please see to it that you don’t compromise on the time you have set for things. Don’t get into this mess. Do things the way you have planned them.
Friends, I have seen that there are two types of students. There are students who focus their attention on what they have studied, what they have learnt, and what are their strong points. The other kind are those students who keep worrying about which type of questions will be asked during exams, whether they will be able to attempt answering them, will the question paper be easy or difficult. You must have noticed this too. Those who are tense and worry about what kind of questions will be asked, end up having a negative impact on their results as well. On the other hand, students who have the confidence in what they know are able to tackle whatever comes in the question paper. Someone who can express this better than me is the person who is a master at checkmating others, who has checkmated some of the greatest minds in the world. He is chess champion Vishwanathan Anand and he will relate his experiences. Come, why don’t you learn how to checkmate in exams from him!
“Hello, this is Viswanathan Anand. First of all, let me start off by wishing you all the best for your exams. I will next talk a little bit about how I went to my exams and my experiences for that. I found that exams are very much like problems you face later in life. You need to be well rested, get a good night’s sleep, you need to be on a full stomach, you should definitely not be hungry and the most important thing is to stay calm. It is very, very similar to a game of Chess. When you play, you don’t know, which pawn will appear, just like in a class you don’t know, which question will appear in an exam. So if you stay calm and you are well nourished and have slept well, then you will find that your brain recalls the right answer at the right moment. So stay calm. It is very important not to put too much pressure on yourself, don’t keep your expectations too high. Just see it as a challenge – do I remember what I was taught during the year, can I solve these problems. At the last minute, just go over the most important things and the things you feel, the topics you feel, you don’t remember very well. You may also recall some incidents with the teacher or the students, while you are writing an exam and this will help you recall a lot of subject matter. If you revise the questions you find difficult, you will find that they are fresh in your head and when you are writing the exam, you will be able to deal with them much better. So stay calm, get a good night’s sleep, don’t be over-confident but don’t be pessimistic either. I have always found that these exams go much better than you fear before. So stay confident and all the very best to you.”
Vishwanathan Anand has really said something very important. You must have also seen that when he plays in international tournaments, he sits with such a healthy composure. He is so focussed. You must have seen his eyes don’t wander off the chess board. We have all heard of how Arjun focussed his attention on the eye of the bird. In the same way, when we watch Vishwanathan playing chess we see his eyes set on the target, focussed on the game very attentively, and that is a reflection of his inner tranquillity. It is difficult to bring that inner peace within you just by someone merely asking you to do so, but one should try. Why don’t we try to do that in a light-hearted manner? If we were to keep smiling and laughing all through the exam days, we would find inner peace. If you don’t speak to your friends, walk alone, and your face droops flipping through the pages of so many books at the last moment, then you cannot have peace of mind. Laugh a lot along with your friends, share jokes with them, and just see how a calm atmosphere is created on its own.
Just imagine yourself standing at the edge of a pond and you can see beautiful things at its bottom. Suddenly someone throws a stone into the water and there are ripples on the surface. Would you be able to see those beautiful things at the bottom like before? If the water is still, then no matter how deep it is, everything at the bottom can be seen. But if the water is agitated, we can see nothing through it.
There is a lot within you, the treasure as a result of the hard work of a whole year is filled inside you, but if your mind is troubled, you will not be able to discover that wealth. If you have a peaceful mind, then that treasure of yours is going to surface to the top and your exam will turn so very simple for you.
I would like to tell you a little thing about myself. There are times when while listening to a lecture or trying to understand some aspect of governance about which I need to know more, I have to concentrate on what is being said. There are occasions when if I have to strain myself to concentrate, I feel an inner stress building up. Then I realize that if I relax a bit, I will feel better. So here is a technique I have developed for myself. I do deep-breathing. I breathe deeply three to five times. Not more than 50 seconds are spent on this but my mind is at rest and ready to be focused on matters at hand. This is my experience and it might be of help to you as well.
Rajat Agarwal has told us something good. He wrote on my app that we should spend half an hour every day with friends and family to feel relaxed. We should chat with them. This is something very important Rajat-ji has told us because what most of us do is that when we return after an exam, we sit down to calculate what we did right and what we did wrong. And if we have educated parents, on top of it parents who are teachers themselves, then they almost end up making us re-write the entire paper. They ask us what we wrote, then start adding numbers to calculate how much we will score, whether it will be 40, 80 or 90. In this way, your mind is totally consumed by what is already over. And what do you do? You also talk about the same thing with your friends over the phone. “What did you write, what was your answer, what did you do, what do you think… Oh! I got that one wrong… I made a mistake there… Oh dear, I knew the answer to that question but I couldn’t remember it then…” We just get caught in all that. Friends, please don’t do this. What happens in the examination hall is over and done there itself. Please chat about otherthings with your family, talk of other topics, refresh your mind with some light banter. If you have gone on holidays with your parents, then try and remember what you saw. Just come out of that exam mindset and spend half an hour with your parents. What Rajat ji has said is worth pondering over.
Friends, what can I tell you about peace of mind today, before you go for your exams. A message has come for you from someone, who is essentially a teacher-turned-a-value educator. From giving interpretations of the Ram Charit Manas in the present day context, he is now involved with trying to spread its values in the country and to the whole world. Our revered Murari Bapu has sent some important tips for students. He is a teacher and a thinker, and for this reason what he has to say is a blend of both.
“I am Murari Bapu speaking and I would like to tell my student friends not to carry any load on their minds during the exams. Decide upon clear thinking, focus your mind wholly and go sit for the exam. And whatever situation appears, accept it. My experience has been that we can remain happy by accepting the circumstances. If you progress ahead in your exams fearlessly and happily, you are sure to gain success. And even if you are not successful, you will not have any remorse. Nor will you be arrogant of your success. I would like to conclude my message with a couplet – ‘It cannot be that one succeeds each time. Learn to also live with failures’. I felicitate this program Mann ki Baat presented by our honorable Prime Minister and my best wishes to all.”
I am also grateful to our revered Murari Bapu for such a nice message.
Friends I want to tell you about another thing today. I see that in the experiences that people have shared with me, they have spoken a lot about Yoga. And this is a matter of joy to me. Everybody I meet, no matter for how short a time, has something to say about Yoga. This is irrespective of whether the person is from another country or from India. It’s nice to hear that so much attraction has grown for Yoga, so much curiosity has developed for Yoga.
Just see how many people on my mobile App… Shri Atanu Mandal, Shri Kunal Gupta, ShriSushant Kumar, Shri K.G. Anand, ShriAbhijeet Kulkarni… countless people have spoken about meditation and emphasized the beneficial effect of Yoga. Friends, if I ask you to start doing Yoga from tomorrow morning then that would be unfair. But those who are already practising Yoga should not stop it during exam time. If you do Yoga, keep doing it. One thing is for sure, whether it is your student days or any other phase of your life, Yoga is a major key to the development of your inner mind. It is one of the simplest keys; you must pay more attention to it.
Yes, if you have someone nearby who knows Yoga, and if you ask them during your exams, and even if you have never done Yoga before, they will surely be able to tell you a few things to do in Yoga that can very easily be done in a few minutes. See if you can do it. I have a lot of faith in Yoga.
My dear young friends, you are in a great hurry to enter the examination hall, you are in a rush to quickly be seated in your place. But why should you do these things in a hurry. Why can’t you manage your time in such a way that even if you are held up in traffic, you can still reach in time for your exam. Otherwise such hurdles can cause new stress. One more thing: With the limited time that we have, we feel that going through the question paper with all the instructions is going to consume a lot of our time. It is not like that dear friends. You must read those instructions very carefully, at most five minutes will be spent in that, but it will not cause any loss. In fact, it will be quite profitable as things become clearer for you and later you won’t have any regrets. I have seen that when we get the question paper, sometimes we find that it has been modelled on a new pattern. But if we have read the instructions with due attention, we can cope well with it. We know – Ah! Yes, that’s the way we have to go about it! I urge you all that even though it takes 5 minutes of your time, you must go through the question paper carefully.
Yash Nagar writes on my mobile App that when he read a question paper for the first time he found it quite difficult, but when he read the same paper with self-confidence telling himself, “this is the only paper I have got and no other questions are going to be given, I have to deal with just these many questions, and so when I started thinking over them again”, he writes, “I was able to understand this paper quite easily… When I read the questions the first time, I felt I did not know the answers to them, but when I read them again, then I realised that the questions had been posed in a different way.” It is very important to understand the questions. When we don’t understand the questions, that’s when we sometimes find them difficult. I forcefully support the point that Yash Nagar has made. You must read the questions twice, thrice, four times over and try to match them with the things that you know and you will find that answering them becomes simple even before you have actually answered them.
It gives me great joy to share with you a message from Bharat Ratna C N R Rao, our most esteemed scientist. He has emphasized the virtue of patience. He has given a brief but very beautiful message to all students. Come,let me tell you the message of Shri Rao.
“This is C.N.R. Rao from Bangalore. I fully realise that the examinations cause anxiety. That too competitive examinations. Do not worry, do your best. That’s what I tell all my young friends. At the same time remember, that there are many opportunities in this country. Decide what you want to do in life and don’t give it up. You will succeed. Do not forget that you are a child of the universe. You have a right to be here like the trees and the mountains. All you need is doggedness, dedication and tenacity. With these qualities you will succeed in all examinations and all other endeavours. I wish you luck in everything you want to do. God Bless.”
See the style of talking that a scientist has! What I take half an hour to say, he says in a few minutes. This is the strength of science and this is the strength that the mind of a scientist possesses. I am grateful to Shri Raofor inspiring the children of the country. The things that he mentioned about dedication, determination, diligence… just keep at it my friends. If you keep going, then even fear will be afraid. And a golden future awaits you for doing well.
Ruchika Dabas has sent a message on my App and shared her experience. She writes that in her family during exams there is a constant effort to create a positive atmosphere. This is true for the neighbouring families as well. All contributed to a positive environment. This is the way it should be. Sachin ji also talked of a positive approach, a positive frame of mind. We have to radiate a positive energy.
There are many things that inspire us, and don’t think that they inspire only students. No matter at which point of life you are at, fine examples and true stories give great inspiration, great strength, and pave a new path in times of trouble. We have all read about the inventor of the electric bulb, Thomas Alva Edison. But friends, have you ever thought how many years he spent on his work, how many times he met with failure, how much time had to be devoted, how much money was spent, how much disappointment he must have faced when he met with failures. But today that electric bulb illuminates our lives. This is what is called the seeds of success inherent in failures.
Who doesn’t know of Srinivas Ramanujam, one of the greatest names among modern Indian mathematicians? Do you know that he had no formal education in Mathematics? Yet he made a significant contribution to various topics like mathematical analysis, number theory, etc. He had a life riddled with difficulties. Despite that, he gave a lot to this world before passing away. J.K. Rowling is a fine example to show that success can come in anyone’s life at any time. The Harry Potter series is now popular worldwide. But it was not like that from the start. She had to face many difficulties, many problems. J. K. Rowling has herself said that in times of trouble she would channelize all her energies into tasks that had real significance for her.
Exams are not just for the students, they also put the students’ families, schools and teachers to test. Without the support system of parents and teachers, the students would not stand a good chance. If teachers, parents and even senior students all combine to form a team, a unit with a common thinking, and in a planned way move forward, then exams become a lot easier.
Keshav Vaishnav has written to me on my App, complaining that parents should never put pressure on their children to score more marks. They should only motivate them to prepare well for their exams. They should think about the need for their child to stay relaxed.
Vijay Jindal writes that parents should not burden their children with their own expectations. They should boost the confidence of their children as much as possible. They should help maintain their children’s faith in themselves. And this is so right.
Today, I don’t want to say much to the parents. Please don’t create any pressure for your children. If they are talking to any friend of theirs, please don’t stop them. Build a light-hearted environment for them, a positive environment, and see for yourself, be it your son or daughter, what confidence they are infused with. You will be able to see that confidence in your child yourself.
Friends, one thing is for sure, and I want to say this especially to my young friends, that our life has become very different from what it was for the previous generations. Every moment there is a new innovation, a new technology. We get to see new facets of science all the time. Its impact is overwhelming; we all want to link ourselves to science and technology. We also want to move ahead with the speed of science. I say all this because, friends, today is National Science Day, the festival of science in this country. Every year this day is observed on 28th February. On 28th February 1928, Sir C.V. Raman had declared his discovery of the “Raman Effect”. This was the discovery for which he received the Nobel Prize. And so the nation celebrates this day as National Science Day. Curiosity is the mother of science. Each person should have a scientific thinking, should be attracted to science. Each generation should lay stress on innovation. And innovation is not possible without science and technology. Today on National Science Day we should resolve that innovation should gain importance. Science, knowledge, technology… all these things should be a part of our journey to development. This year the theme for National Science Day is ‘Make in India Science and Technology-driven Innovations’. I humbly pay my homage to Sir C.V. Raman and I appeal to you all to raise the level of your interest in science.
Friends, sometimes success comes very late and when it does come to us, our way of looking at life changes completely. As you have been kept very busy with the coming exams, it might be possible that many news stories may not have registered on your minds. But I want to repeat this for all fellow citizens as well. You must have heard recently there has been a major and important discovery in the world of science. Scientists have labored hard, generations of them have persevered, and after nearly 100 years they have gained a huge success. Gravitational Wave has been brought to light with the efforts of our scientists. This is a success for science which was very difficult to achieve. This discovery not only proves the theory of our greatest scientist of the previous century, Albert Einstein, but is also considered a great discovery for the world of physics. It is going to be of use for the whole of humankind. But being Indians, we should all feel happy that in the entire process of this discovery, the sons of our country, our worthy Indian scientists, were also a part of it. I would like to extend my hearty congratulations to all those scientists. Our scientists will be involved in the future as well to take this discovery forward; India will be a part of future international efforts.
My dear fellow citizens, in the last few days we have taken an important decision. To gain more success about this discovery, the Government of India has decided to install a Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory, in short it is called LIGO, here in India. This kind of a facility exists only in two places in the world. India is going to be the third. This process is going to gain fresh momentum and strength with India joining hands with others. India, with its reputed resources, will surely be an active participant in this superior science discovery which is for the welfare of humankind. I once again congratulate all scientists and send them my best wishes.
My dear fellow citizens, I would like you to note down one number. From tomorrow, you can give a missed call on this number and listen to Mann ki Baat. You can even listen to it in your mother tongue. The number to give a missed call on is 81908-81908. I repeat 81908-81908.
Friends, your exams begin from day after tomorrow. I have to take an exam tomorrow. 125 crore people of this country are going to take my exam. You know it, don’t you? Tomorrow is Budget Day. 29th February. It is a leap year. But, you must have noticed and felt it while you heard me speak how fit and brimming with confidence I am. My exam gets over tomorrow and yours begin the dayafter. Let us hope we all are successful, then the country will surely succeed.
So friends lots of good wishes to you all. Free from all tension of success and failure, move ahead with a free mind. Keep going at it.
Thank You.


18. MARCH 27, 2016
My Dear Fellow Citizens,
Let me begin by wishing ‘Namaskar’ to all of you. Today, the world over, Christians are observing Easter. I extend my warmest greetings to everybody on the occasion of Easter.
Some of my young friends must be busy with their examinations. Some of them must have gotten over with their examinations by now. For those of you who still have examinations, it must be a testing time with exams on one hand and T-20 Cricket World Cup on the other. I am sure you are eagerly waiting for the match between India and Australia this evening.
Some days ago India won two fine matches against Pakistan and Bangladesh. We are seeing a fine momentum building up in this T-20 Cricket World Cup. Today, as India and Australia get ready to play, I convey my best wishes to both the teams.
With the young comprising 65% of our population, there should be no reason why we should be absent from the world of sports. This won’t do. We need to usher revolutionary changes in sports. We can see that happening in India. As with Cricket, there’s now increasing interest in Football, Hockey, Tennis, and Kabaddi.
You must have come to know that India will be hosting the FIFA Under-17 World Cup next year. Twenty-four teams from all over the world are coming to play in our country. The Indian Football team won the gold medal at the Asian Games in 1951 and 1962, and came fourth in the 1956 Olympics. Unfortunately, over the decades we have slipped from there to the lowest rungs. Today our ranking in FIFA is so low that I feel reluctant even to mention it.
On the other hand, I have been noticing that interest in Football among the youth in India has been rising – be it the English Premier League, Spanish League or the Indian Super League matches. Young Indians take time out to get the latest information on these matches and watch them on television. What I mean to say is, given this rising popular interest in Football and the opportunity of hosting FIFA Under-17 World Cup, shall we just play the role of a host and fulfil our responsibility? Or will we use the opportunity to our advantage to promote sports?
We should create an atmosphere of Football, Football, Football all around for this whole year – in schools, colleges, indeed, all over India. Our youth, the children in our schools, should be drenched in sweat just playing Football. If that happens, we shall have real fun playing the host. So, all of us should make the effort to ensure Football reaches every village, street and alley. Between now and the FIFA Under-17 World Cup in 2017, we should infuse a spirit of enthusiasm in the youth. One advantage of playing the host for this event is that a whole lot of infrastructure will get created with addition of sports facilities. But I personally shall be happy when we are able to link every youth of our country to this game.
Friends, I would like to hear your views on how best to use the 2017 FIFA Under-17 World Cup to our advantage. How should this event be? What kind of programmes should we organise the whole year to help the event gain momentum? How should it be publicised? What improvements do we need to make? How can we increase the interest of our youth in sports through the 2017 FIFA under-17 World Cup? How can we introduce an element of competitiveness in governments, educational institutes and social organisations to associate with the game?
We can see all this happening in relation to cricket; we should now try to bring these elements in relation to other sports disciplines as well. The FIFA event offers us a unique opportunity to do so. Can you send me your suggestions on how best to use that opportunity? I view the FIFA event as a great opportunity to establish India as a brand at a global level. I consider this to be an opportunity to let the world know of India’s youth power – not in the sense of winning or losing a match. In the run-up to and preparation for the 2017 FIFA event, we can harness and display our many strengths; while doing so, we can do image-branding for India as well.
I look forward to your suggestions on the 2017 FIFA Under-17 World Cup which you can send me through NarendraModiApp. Do let me know what should be the logo and the slogans. How should we propagate this throughout India? What should the songs be like? What should be in the souvenirs? Think about it friends. I would like every youth of mine to become an ambassador for the 2017 FIFA Under-17 World Cup. You should robustly participate in this event. It’s a golden chance to build India’s image.
My dear students, you must have thought of travelling to places during your holidays. There are very few people who go abroad; most people visit places within their own states for a week or so. Some people also go outside their states. Last time too, I had requested all of you to upload photographs of the places you visit. And I have noticed that the kind of work which our Department of Tourism, our Department of Culture, State Governments and the Government of India can’t do, that kind of work has been accomplished by millions and millions of Indian tourists. Photos of such magnificent places were uploaded that it was truly a delight to view them.
We have to take this task forward. Do it this time as well. But this time, along with a photo, please write and send a small piece about the place, thus displaying your creative prowess. One gets to learn a lot by visiting new places. Things we can’t learn in a classroom, within our family, from our friends, sometimes we can learn those things by travelling. We get to experience something fresh with each new place we visit – we learn about people, their languages, foods and lifestyles. Someone has rightly said that “A traveller without observation is a bird without wings”. “If you have a desire to truly view, you should also develop an insight.” India is full of diversities. Once you set out to see the country, for the rest of your life you will keep seeing new things and still never get enough of it. I have been fortunate that I had a lot of opportunities to travel. When I was neither Chief Minister nor Prime Minster, and I was young like you, I travelled a lot. Perhaps there isn’t a district in India which I have not visited.
Travel plays a very strong role in shaping our lives. These days the youth of India are being driven by a spirit of adventure and curiosity. Unlike before, they don’t want to go to the same old places or tread the oft beaten track. They want to do something new, see something new. I see this as a good sign. Our youth should be bold. They should be brave. They should have the courage to set foot on places where no one has been before.
In this context, I would like to specially congratulate Coal India. Western Coalfields Limited at Savaner near Nagpur, where there are coal mines, has developed an Eco-friendly Mine-Tourism Circuit. Generally we don’t think of coal mines as places to be visited. When we see pictures of miners, we wonder what it must be like out there. We even have a saying, “Coal blackens your hands”, hence people tend to stay away from coal mines. But Western Coalfields Limited has made these same coal mines a destination for tourism. This is only the beginning, but already nearly 10,000 people have visited this Eco-friendly Mine-tourism site at Savaner near Nagpur. This in itself gives us an opportunity to see something new.
I hope that when you set out on a journey during the coming holidays you can contribute something to cleanliness too. There is greater awareness about cleanliness and people are making an effort to keep tourism destinations litter-free. Both tourists and local residents of these places are contributing to it. Maybe it is not being done in a very scientific way, but it is being done. Can you too, being a tourist, lay stress on cleanliness at tourist destinations? I am confident that our youth will definitely help me in this task.
Tourism is a sector that provides maximum employment. Even the poorest person gets a chance to earn from tourism. When tourists visit a place, even the not-so-well-off among them spend money. Rich tourists are bound to spend more money. There are many employment opportunities created by tourism. India lags far behind in tourism when compared to the world. But if we, 125 crore Indians, decide that we have to give importance to our tourism sector, we can attract the world. We can draw a very large number of tourists to our side. Through this we can provide new employment opportunities to several million young people in India. Be it the government, institutions, society, citizens – we all have to come together to make this happen. Come, let’s make an endeavour in this direction.
My dear young friends, I don’t like it when holidays are just frittered away. You too should think along these lines. Will you let your holidays during the most important years of your life slip away just like that? I will give you something to ponder upon. Can you resolve to add one skill, one special attribute to your personality, during your holidays? If you don’t know how to swim, can you resolve to learn swimming during the holidays? If you don’t know how to cycle, can you resolve to learn cycling during the holidays? Or you could tell yourself, “I type with just two fingers on the keyboard, so shouldn’t I learn proper way of typing?” There are so many skills to develop our personality. Why not learn them? Why not overcome some of our shortcomings? Why not add to our strengths? Do give it a thought.
It is not like you need lots of classes, a great trainer, hefty fees or a big budget for this. You can find something around you. Let’s say you decide to make the ‘best’ out of ‘waste’. Just look for some waste material and start creating something from it. You will enjoy it. By the time evening falls, you will marvel at what you have created from that rubbish. Suppose you are fond of painting and you don’t know how to paint. Just start painting and gradually you will get better at it. You must spend your holidays on building your personality by developing some new talent, acquiring some new skill. There can be countless areas where you could do so; it is not as if these are confined to only the ones that I am spelling out for you. This will help you in carving out your own identity and raising your self-confidence tremendously. Just try it for yourself. When you return to school or college and tell your classmates about what you learned during the holidays, and when your friends find that they have not learned anything new, they will realise that they wasted their time. They will admire you, “You are a very determined man, my friend, you have accomplished something concrete.” This will perhaps become a big thing among friends. I am confident that you will surely do it and, yes, do share with me what you have learned.
This time a lot of suggestions have come for Mann Ki Baat on www.mygov.in: –
Sound Byte- “My name is Abhi Chaturvedi. Namaste dear Prime Minister, you had said during the last summer holidays that even birds feel the summer heat so we should fill a bowl with water and place it in the balcony or the terrace so that the birds can come to have water. I did this and enjoyed it and in this way I made friends with a lot of birds. I request you to repeat this task in Mann Ki Baat. Thank You.”
My dear fellow citizens, I would like to express my gratitude to this little boy Abhi. He called me up and reminded me of what I had said. Frankly, I had forgotten about it. And I did not have it in my mind that I would say something on this topic, but Abhi has reminded me that last year I had asked you to put an earthen bowl filled with water for the birds.
Friends, I want to thank this boy Abhi Chaturvedi. He has reminded me of a good deed by calling me. Last summer I had remembered it and asked you to put water in earthen bowls for the birds during summers. Abhi has told me that he has been doing this for a whole year and many birds have now become his friends. The great Hindi poetess Mahadevi Verma used to love birds. She wrote this in one of her poems, “We shall not let you fly far way, we shall fill the courtyard with grains and fill the tank with sweet and cool water…” Come, let us also do what Mahadevi Ji used to do. I greet Abhi and thank him for reminding me of this very important thing.
Shilpa Kukke from Mysore has raised a very humane issue. She says milkmen, newspaper vendors, postmen come close to our homes. Sometimes utensil hawkers and cloth sellers too pass by our homes. Have we ever offered them some drinking water during the summer days? Have we ever given them water to drink? Shilpa, I am very grateful to you that you have articulated something so sensitive in so simple a manner. It is a small gesture but when the postman comes and we offer him water, he will feel good. Of course, it is a part of our nature in India. But I am glad, Shilpa, that you have observed these things.
My dear farmer brothers and sisters, you must have repeatedly heard the term – Digital India. Some people feel that Digital India is to do with the world of the youth in our cities. No, it’s not like that. You will be happy to learn that a ‘Kisan Suvidha App’ has been launched to serve your interests. If you download this ‘Kisan Suvidha App’ on your mobile phone, you will receive a lot of information related to agriculture and weather at your fingertips. There are many topics on this App, such as what is the state of the market, what is the position of the wholesale market, which crops are doing well these days, which are the appropriate pesticides. Not just this. There is a button on the App which will connect you directly with agricultural scientists and link you with the experts. If you pose a question to them, they will reply to it; they will explain things to you. I hope that my farmer brothers and sisters will download the ‘Kisan Suvidha App’ on their mobile phones. Why don’t you have a look at this gift for you and give it a try to see if something in it is of use to you? If you feel it lacks in anything then you can complain to me also.
My dear farmer brothers and sisters, summer is holiday time for the rest of the people, but for you it is the time to sweat it out even more. A farmer waits for the rains. Before that, he puts in his life and soul to get his field ready so that not even a single drop of rain water goes waste. For farmers, the season just before onset of farming is of utmost importance. We will have to give a thought to what will happen if there’s no water. Can we utilise this time to visit ponds, check the routes through which water flows into these ponds and spot the places where garbage or something else blocks the water from flowing, because of which reservoirs get depleted. Can we not remove the blockage and clean the inlets so that more water gets collected? If we manage to save and collect more water during the first rainfall and fill up our ponds, rivers and streams, then even if the rains fail later, our losses will be reduced. But this can be possible only when we conserve each and every drop of water.
You must have noticed that this time it has been decided to construct five lakh ponds and farm water reservoirs. Under MNREGA also a stress has been given to create assets for water conservation. Every village should save water. How can we save every drop of water during the coming rains? How do we begin an exercise to ensure that every drop of water in the village stays within the village? You should devise a plan and get connected with Government schemes so that we can start a people’s movement which will help us understand the importance of water. Then everyone can join in the campaign for water conservation. There must be many such villages in the country, many progressive farmers and many conscientious citizens who have already done this kind of work. But we still need to do much more in this direction.
My dear farmer brothers and sisters, a few days ago the Government of India had organised a very big Kisan Mela, ‘Farmers’ Fair’. There I saw the modern technology that is now available for farmers and how much change has come in agriculture. But we have to ensure that this technology reaches the fields. Now even the farmers have started saying the use of fertilisers should be curtailed. I welcome this. Excessive use of fertilisers has made our Mother Earth unwell. We are the children of our soil, so how can we watch our Mother Earth suffering? When we add spices and condiments while cooking our food, it adds to the taste. But if we add too much of even the best of the spices and condiments, then would one want to eat that food? The same food would taste so bad, isn’t it? The same thing happens with fertilisers as well.
No matter how good fertilisers may be, if we use them beyond a limit they will become the cause of ruination. There should be a balance in everything. This will reduce your expenses and you will end up saving money. Our stand is clear: Less Cost, More Output. Invest Less and Reap More. We should move forward with this ‘mantra’ and improve our agriculture sector by using scientific methods. I hope we will do, with full concentration, whatever is necessary for water conservation. We have a couple of months till the onset of monsoon. Do remember, the more we save water, the more the farmers will benefit and more lives will be saved.
My dear fellow citizens, the World Health Day is on 7th April. This year the theme of the World Health Day is ‘Beat Diabetes’. I call upon all of you to defeat Diabetes which plays host to so many diseases. Once it enters yours body, a whole lot of undesirable guests in the form of illnesses follow it. It is said that in 2014 India had about six and a half crore Diabetics. Diabetes was found to be the cause of death in three per cent of all deaths. Diabetes is of two types — Type 1 and Type 2. Type 1 is hereditary; if the parents have it, so shall their child. Type 2 is due to your habits, age and obesity. The world is worried about Diabetes and so it has been chosen as the theme for World Health Day on 7th April.
We all know that our lifestyle is the biggest cause for Diabetes. Physical labour is getting reduced. There is not a trace of sweat; there is just no walking around. Even if we play games, we play them online; very little happens offline. Can we not, drawing inspiration from this year’s World Health Day and its theme, do something to defeat Diabetes in our personal life? If you are interested in Yoga, then do Yoga. Or else, the least you can do is to go for a walk or a run. If every citizen of my country is healthy, then my country will be healthy. Sometimes we are reluctant to get our medical check-up done. When the condition worsens then only does it come to our notice that it is Diabetes to blame. What do you lose in getting a check-up done? Please get this much done at least. Everything is available and a check-up can be done easily. Please do be concerned about this.
On March 24th, the world observed Tuberculosis Day. When I was a child we would be scared by the very mention of the word TB. It would seem death was inevitable for anybody suffering from this dreaded disease. But now we are not scared of it because everybody knows TB is curable and can be easily cured. Paradoxically, when TB was linked to death we used to be duly afraid of it; but now that it is curable, we have become almost careless about it. Compared to the world, we still have a large number of TB patients. If we want to free ourselves and our country from TB, then we need correct treatment, we need complete treatment. If we leave the treatment mid-way, it can create new complications for us. Tuberculosis is one disease that even the neighbours can spot. “Oh look! You have a persistent cough and fever and you have lost weight. Go get it checked. You must have got TB.” This shows TB is one illness that can be detected fast.
My dear fellow citizens, there is a lot of work being done in this direction. There are more than 13,500 Microscopy Centres, more than four lakh DOTS providers, various advanced laboratories. And all these services are free. Please go and get a check-up done. This disease can be got rid of. All one needs is the correct treatment and the treatment must continue till the illness is gone completely. I would like to appeal to you all, whether it is TB or Diabetes, we have to conquer these. We have to eradicate these diseases from India. But this cannot happen with just the efforts of the government or by doctors or medicines till you don’t do something about it. So I call upon all of you today to defeat Diabetes and free ourselves from Tuberculosis.
My dear fellow citizens, a number of important occasions are coming up in April, especially on 14th of April which happens to be the birth anniversary of Baba Saheb Bhimrao Ambedkar. His 125th birth anniversary was celebrated all over the country. The five pilgrimage spots associated with him – Mhow, his birthplace; London, where he was educated, Nagpur, where he had his ‘Deeksha’; 26, Alipur Road, Delhi, where his soul left him for its heavenly abode; and the cremation ground in Mumbai where his last rites were performed. We are making a constant effort to develop these five pilgrimage spots. I am fortunate to get the chance to visit Mhow, the birthplace of our revered Baba Saheb Ambedkar, on 14th April this year. Baba Saheb has given us a lot to help shape us into ideal citizens. We can pay our best homage to him by following the path set by him and becoming good citizens.
In a few days from now, the new year of Vikram Samvat will begin. It is celebrated in different states in different forms. Some call it Nav Samvatsar, some call it Gudi Padva, some Varsh Pratipada, some Ugadi, but it holds importance in nearly all the states of India. My greetings to everybody on this auspicious occasion of New Year.
As you know and I had said it last time also, you can now listen to my Mann Ki Baat in about 20 languages whenever you wish to. You can choose your own convenient time to listen to it. You can listen to it on your own mobile handset. All you have to do is to give a missed call. I am happy to state that although it has been barely a month since this service was launched, 35 lakh people have availed of it. You too can note down the number. 81908-81908. I repeat – 81908-81908. Give a missed call on this number whenever it is convenient for you. Even if you wish to listen to any previous episode of Mann Ki Baat, you can listen to it in the language of your choice. I will be happy to remain connected with you.
My dear fellow citizens, my heartiest best wishes to you all. Many, many thanks.




19. APRIL 24, 2016
My dear fellow citizens, Namaskar!
It’s summer. Everybody makes plans for their summer holidays. Since this is the season of mangoes, we crave for the flavour and taste of this fruit. Sometimes we feel a nap in the afternoon would be nice. But this year the sweltering heat has spoilt the fun for everybody.
It is quite natural for the nation to feel concerned about the unrelenting heat. On top of it, due to continuous drought over the past couple of years, the usual water storage facilities have been adversely affected. Sometimes due to encroachment, sometimes due to silting, the inflow of water into reservoirs and other water bodies gets blocked. As a result, the reservoirs store much less water than their capacity. Worse, because of this cycle that has been going on for years, the capacity itself of these reservoirs is gradually reduced. To cope with the drought and to provide relief from the water crisis, governments are making efforts. But that’s not all. I have noticed that citizens are doing commendable work to help deal with the situation. Awareness is now seen in many villages. Only those who have faced shortage of water know the real value of water. Hence, in such places they are very sensitive about water and are equally active in doing something to deal with the shortage of water.
I was recently told that in Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra, the Hivrebazaar Gram Panchayat and its villagers have addressed the problem of water shortage by treating it as a major and delicate issue. One can find many villages where there is a desire to store water. At Hivrebazaar the farmers tackled the issue by changing the cropping pattern. They have decided to give up cultivation of those crops that require a lot of water, like sugarcane and banana. It sounds very simple, but in reality it is not so. What a big collective decision this must have been? If one tells the owners of factories that consume a lot of water about the consequences of this consumption and requests them to shut down their units, one can well imagine what the response would be. But see the sensibility of these farmer brothers. When they realised that the cultivation of the sugarcane should be given up because it consumed a lot of water, they went ahead and did it. Instead of sugarcane, they have taken to such crops like fruits and vegetables that require much less water. Farmers in this village have taken so many initiatives such as using sprinklers, drip irrigation techniques, water harvesting and water recharging, that today their village is strong enough to cope with the water crisis that they face. I might be talking of a small place like Hivrebazaar, but there must be many other such villages. I extend my hearty felicitations to such villagers for their fine work.
I was told that in Devas district of Madhya Pradesh, the Gorva Gram Panchayat took up the drive to create farm ponds. They have already created 27 farm ponds. Due to this there has been an increase in the ground water level. Whenever water was required for crops, farmers had access to it. This panchayat has given a rough estimate that their agricultural production has increased by 20 per cent. Not only has water been saved, the quality of water has also vastly improved with the water level increasing. World over it is said that potable water can contributing factor for GDP growth. It certainly contributes to better health.
When the government used railways to transport water to Latur, it became news for the world. There is no doubt that the swift manner in which Indian Railways has acted is praiseworthy. But villagers who have taken various initiatives to save water also deserve equal amount of praise. Indeed, I would say they deserve greater praise. There are several such schemes and programmes that are run by citizens but these doesn’t get our attention. The good work done by the government sometimes does come to our notice. If we look around us, we will see that people are making an effort to combat the menace of drought by trying to find solutions that are new and innovative.
It is human nature that no matter how many perils people face, when they hear a good news from any corner, they feel as if the entire crisis is over. Thus ever since the day it became public knowledge that rainfall this year is expected to be between 106% and 110% it seems as if tidings of peace and happiness have come. There is still some time for the monsoon to arrive, but the news of good rains has already brought joy. At the same time we must remember that a good monsoon offers both an opportunity and a challenge. Can we start a drive to save water in every village from now on itself? Farmers need fertile soil in their fields to grow crops. This time why can’t we take the soil from the bottom of ponds for our fields? If we were to do this, the quality of the soil in our fields would improve and the capacity of ponds to store water would increase. Can we fill empty cement and fertiliser bags with pebbles and sand and use them to stop water from flowing out through breaches? If we were to stop water from draining out for five days, for seven days, it would seep into the ground and the water level would come up. There would be sufficient water in our water-wells. Thus we should strive to retain as much water as possible. The water of a village will be preserved there if we work for it in a determined manner collectively. Therefore, notwithstanding the current water scarcity and drought situation, we have an opportunity during coming one and half months to prepare to harvest rainwater.
I have always said that people who visit Porbandar, the birthplace of Mahatma Gandhi, can also see there the underground tanks constructed about 200 years ago, that were built to save rain water. Water collected in these tanks remained pure.
Mr. Kumar Krishna has asked on MyGov whether “the cleaning of Ganga will be possible while we our alive”. His concern is quite natural because it has been nearly 30 years since work began in this direction. Many governments came, plans were made to clean Ganga, and a lot of expenditure was incurred without showing results. For this reason there must be crores of Indians like Kumar Krishna who have the same question in their hearts. For those who are religiously inclined, Ganga is the path to salvation for them. I too accept this importance of Ganga. But more than that, Ganga is the giver of life. We get our daily bread from Ganga, we get our earnings from Ganga, and we get a new source of energy from Ganga to live our lives. The flow of Ganga adds momentum to the economic pace of the country. Bhagirath did bring down the river Ganga for us, but to save it, we need crores of Bhagiraths. The project to clean Ganga cannot be successful without mass participation by the people. So we all will have to become agents of change to achieve cleanliness. We shall have to continuously keep on repeating this thing. There are many efforts being made by the government. We are seeking the full cooperation of all the states through which Ganga flows. We are also trying to get voluntary organisations to join us in this effort. We have taken several steps for surface cleaning and to stop industrial pollution. Every day, effluents and garbage in a large quantity flow into Ganga through drains. At Varanasi, Allahabad, Kanpur, Patna – trash skimmers have been deployed which clean the river while floating on it. All local bodies have been given this facility and they have been urged to carry on with this work continuously and clean all the garbage from the river. I have been told a few days ago that in places where this work is being carried out properly nearly 3 to 11 tonnes of garbage are being taken out of the river every day. So it would be correct to say that pollutants in such a large quantity are being stopped from getting into the river. In the coming days, we have plans to deploy such trash skimmers at other places also and the benefits of it will be felt by the people living on the banks of Ganga and Yamuna.
To monitor and control industrial pollution, an action plan has been prepared with the pulp and paper, distillery and sugar industries, and it has also been implemented to some extent. I feel it will yield good results. I am very happy that in Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh, where there was discharge from distilleries, there has been a change for the better. Officers have told me that they have been successful in securing zero liquid discharge. The discharge from the pulp and paper industry or the liquor industry is almost coming to an end. All these things are a sign that we are moving in the right direction and awareness has also increased. I have seen that not just on the banks of Ganga, even in far off South if one meets a person, he is sure to ask, “ Sir, will Ganga be cleaned?” This faith and hope of the common people is going to ensure success in the cleaning of Ganga. People are even giving donations for this. Thus this effort is being made quite meticulously.
My dear fellow citizens, today is the 24th of April. This is observed as Panchayati Raj Day in India. On this day, the Panchayati Raj system was implemented in our country. Panchayati Raj system has gradually spread to the entire country and is functioning successfully as an important unit of our democratic system of governance.
We celebrated 14th April as the 125th birth anniversary of Babasaheb Ambedekar and today we celebrate 24th April as Panchayati Raj Day. This was such a fortunate coincidence. From the birth anniversary of the great man who gave us the Constitution of India, to 24th April, the day Panchayati Raj was introduced in our country to empower our villages, which are the strongest link of our Constitution. It inspired linking these two dates. For this reason, the Government of India, along with the cooperation of the State Governments, has launched a campaign – “From Gram Uday to Bharat Uday” – From the Rise of Villages to the Ascent of India, over the 10-day period between 14th April and 24th April.
It was my good fortune that on 14th April, the birth anniversary of Babasaheb Ambedkar, I got the opportunity to visit his birthplace Mhow and pay my respects at that sacred place. And today, on 24th April, I am going to Jharkhand, where mostly my tribal brothers and sisters stay. In Jharkhand I am going to celebrate Panchayati Raj Divas. At 3 in the afternoon I shall be talking to all panchayats of the country. This campaign has worked in a major way to generate awareness. How can the democratic institutions at the village level, in every corner of India, be strengthened? How can the villages become self-reliant? How can villages plan programmes for their own development? There should be due importance laid on physical and social infrastructure. There should be no school dropouts in villages and the campaign to educate the girl child (Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao Abhiyan) should be successfully carried out. The birth of the girl child should be celebrated in a big way. There should be some plans to do that. In some villages people organised food donation on this occasion. It happens very rarely that so many different programmes go on at the same time in so many villages of India. I congratulate all the State Governments and the village heads. They have gone about these programmes in a very novel way for the welfare of villages, for the development of villages and for the strengthening of democracy. The awareness that has come about in villages guarantees a new progress for India. The foundation for the progress of India is the rise of its villages; so if we all keep laying stress on the progress of the villages, we shall continue to get the desired results.
Sharmila Dharpure from Mumbai has expressed her concern to me through her phone call. Sound byte-
“Mr. Prime Minister Namaskar. I am Sharmila Dharpure speaking from Mumbai. I have a question for you about the school and college education. For the last so many years, a strong need for reforms has been felt in the education sector. Either the required amount of schools and colleges are not there or else the quality in education is lacking. It has been often found that the children complete their schooling but they still don’t have knowledge about the most basic things and so they lag behind in this competitive world. What are your views? How do you wish to bring about reforms?”
Sharmilaji, your concern is quite genuine. Today in every home, the first thing that the parents dream of is to give their children good education. A house, a car – all that comes later. And for a country like India, this common sentiment of the people is a very big force. To educate their children and educate them well, this concern for the children to get good education should increase further and a greater awareness should come about. I believe that when there is awareness in the family, it impacts the school and has an impact on teachers as well. The child is also aware of the purpose for which he or she goes to school. So I would appeal to all guardians and parents to give not just enough time and attention to their children but also to everything that’s happenings in their school. And if something strikes your attention, please go to the school and discuss it with the teachers yourself. Vigilance can be of help to reduce many shortcomings in the education system. People’s participation will go a long way in achieving this.
Every Government in our country has laid stress on education and every Government has made efforts for it in its own way. It is true that for a long time our focus has been on setting up educational institutions, expanding the system of education, building schools, building colleges, recruiting teachers, ensuring maximum attendance of children. So priority has been given in a way to the spread of education. This was necessary. But today more than expanding education what is necessary is to improve the quality of education. We have already done a lot towards expanding education. Now we will have to focus on quality education. We will have to shift our priority from literacy campaign to good education. Till now we concentrated on the outlay for education. The time has come to focus on the outcome of it. Till now the stress has been on how many are attending school. From now onward, more than schooling, we will have to lay stress on learning. Till now we have heard the echo of the mantra of Enrolment! Enrolment! Enrolment! But now we will have to turn our attention to providing good education, worthy education to children who have made it to schools. You must have seen the Budget of the present government. An effort is being made to provide quality education. But it is true we still have a long way to go. If we, 125 crore Indians, resolve, we can cover that distance. Sharmila ji has rightly said that we do need to bring reforms for quality education.
You must have noticed in the Budget that we have decided to do something unconventional. In the Budget, we have made 10 government universities and 10 private universities free from government control and asked them to accept the challenge to flourish on their own. We have asked them to come up with what they would like to do to become the best universities. We have done this with the intention of giving them a free hand. Indian universities can also compete with world class universities, and they should. Along with importance to education, there is importance to skill. Likewise, technology plays a very big role in education. Long distance education and technology will make the task of education simpler. I believe that the results of this move are going to be seen in the near future.
Since a long time people have been asking me questions on one topic. Some have written on my web portal mygov.in, others have written to me on NarendraModiApp. It’s mostly the youth who write to me.
Sound Byte-
“Mr. Prime Minister Namaskar, I am Mona Karnwal from Bijnore. For the youth in today’s age, along with studies, sports are also of great importance. They should have a feeling of team spirit and the qualities of a good leader for their overall holistic development. I state this from my own experience because I have served in the Bharat Scouts and Guides and this had a very good impact upon my life. I want you to motivate the youth as much as you can, and I want the government to also promote NCC, NSS and the Bharat Scouts and Guides as much as possible.”
You people have been sending me so many suggestions that one day I felt that first of all I must talk to these people. It was under pressure from you people, following your suggestions, that I recently called for a meeting with the chiefs of NCC, NSS, Bharat Scouts and Guides, Red Cross and the Nehru Yuva Kendra. I asked them if they have ever had a meeting before, and they said that since Independence, this was the first time that they were attending a meeting like this. So first I would like to felicitate my young friends who put pressure on me, the result of which was that I held this meeting. I felt glad that I met them. I felt the need for greater coordination. They are doing a lot in their own way but if work is done collectively, in an organized manner, then these various organizations of ours can bring about huge results. They are spread so wide, reaching out to so many families. I saw an answer in the way they had spread far and wide and were filled with enthusiasm, they had the resolve to do something. It’s true that I myself have been a cadet in the NCC and so I know firsthand how one acquires a fresh perspective through such organizations. Children draw inspiration and develops a national perspective. I did get the benefit of that in my childhood. I believe that we should infuse a new life, a new force into these organizations. This time I put some issues before them. I told them that for this season why don’t all these organizations and our youth make an effort for water conservation. We could collectively try and stop open defecation in so many blocks and so many districts. What kind of programmes can we make to unite our country? Can we have a common youth song for all these organizations? We spoke on many issues.
Today, I appeal to you all as well. Please suggest the perfect ideas for these youth organizations. Do we need to add anything new in their functioning and their programmes? If you write to me on my NarendraModiApp , I will send them to the right place. After this meeting, I feel they are going to gain a new momentum. Now even you will wish to join one of them.
My dear fellow citizens, I now wish to talk about something that will compel us all to think. I view it also as something that is going to shake us all. You must have seen for yourself that the political situation in our country is such that in the previous elections political parties made promises of giving each household 9 to 12 gas cylinders. And each political party felt that if they had to politically approach the middle class society, then gas cylinder was a major issue. On the other hand, economists have put constant pressure to reduce the subsidy on gas cylinders. For this reason, many committees would sit which would receive many proposals and suggestions on the issue of lessening the gas subsidy. Crores of rupees would be spent on these committees. But the matter would remain at a standstill. This has been everybody’s experience. No one ever thought beyond this.
Today, my dear fellow citizens, I have utmost pleasure in placing before you all my own account on this. I have chosen the third way out and that is the path of placing trust and confidence in the people and the masses. At times we political leaders should trust our people more than we trust ourselves. We should have implicit faith in the people. I had once said to you that if you can bear the expense of 1500-2000 rupees per year, then why don’t you give up your subsidy on gas? This could be of use to poor households. I had said it just like that, but today I can say with confidence that I am indeed very proud of you all. One crore families have voluntarily given up their subsidy on gas cylinders. These one crore are not wealthy families. Among them are retired teachers, retired clerks, farmers, small shopkeepers. These are middle class and lower middle class families that have given up their subsidy. Now look at the other, rather unique, side of it. They could have given up their subsidy through the App on their mobile, going online or by giving a missed call over the telephone. There were many options. But it has been estimated that more than 80% of these one crore families chose to go to the distributor, stand in a queue and give in writing that they wish to surrender their subsidy.
My dear fellow citizens, this is not a small matter. If the government gives even a small concession on tax or exemption from tax, then for a whole week we hear praise for that government being splashed on TV channels and in newspapers. Here, these one crore families have given up their subsidy. And in our country subsidy has turned into a kind of a right that people expect. A thing like that they have chosen to give up.
I would like to salute those one crore families. I humbly bow to them because they have compelled political leaders to think of coming up with something new. This has also forced the economists of the country to think differently. Even the global economic experts who used to live in a world of their calculations would find this phenomenon to be beyond their limits of traditional wisdom. At some point of time they will also have to think of this novel experience that has defied conventional thinking. One crore families giving up their subsidy on gas cylinders and in return one crore poor families getting gas cylinders with the money that is saved from the one crore families that have given up their subsidy. Externally, it appears just an incident But, its extraordinary lesson is that if you place faith in the people, it leads to most handsome achievements.
I would like to specially appeal to the entire political class to place implicit faith in the people. That will fetch such terrific results that one could have never ever imagined. We should move in this direction. I have always felt this way, like when I felt why Class 3 and Class 4 employees should be made to go through interviews. We should trust the person who has given the exams and submitted the marks.
Sometimes I feel that we should publicly announce that today on this route of the railways there will be no ticket checker. Let’s see what happens when we place faith in the people of India. We can undertake several such experiments. Once we place faith and trust in the people of India, we can get incomparable results. Anyway, these are just some personal thoughts. We cannot make these into government rules but we can certainly create that kind of an atmosphere. This atmosphere has not been created by any political leader but by one crore families of India.
A person called Ravi has written to me – “Good News Everyday — he writes — please ask your officials to post about one good incident every day. Each newspaper and news channel has bad news for its every ‘breaking news’. Is there not anything good happening around in this country populated by 125 crore people? Please change this situation.”
Ravi ji has expressed his anger but I think he is not venting his anger on me but on the prevailing conditions. You may remember that the former President of India, Dr A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, used to always say, “Please print only positive news on the front page of the newspaper”. He used to continuously repeat that.
Some days back a newspaper had written a letter to me saying that they had decided that on Mondays they would not give any negative news but only positive news. These days I have noticed that some T.V. channels have begun setting aside some time for positive news.
So it is right to say that there is an atmosphere all around of positive news. And everybody feels that the people should get the right news and good news. It is true that even if the most highly placed men and women relate the best possible things in the best possible words and in the best possible manner, good news has a better impact than that. Good news becomes the greatest reason and inspiration to do something good.
It is true that the more we give prominence to good things, the less space there will be for bad things. If we light a lamp, the darkness is sure to be dispelled. You all must be aware that the government has started a website,transforming india. On this you get news of positive happenings, not just of the government but also of the people around. This is a portal where even you can send news of any good thing that’s happened to you. You can contribute to the site.
Raviji you have given a good suggestion, but please don’t get angry with me. We all should strive together to do something positive, talk about something positive, to spread something positive.
There is one great speciality of our country — the Kumbh Mela. The Kumbh Mela can become the centre of tourist attraction as well. Very few know that since a long time, crores and crores of people have gathered on the river-banks for this festival. The peaceful atmosphere at the Kumbh Mela gives moments of tranquillity to the soul. These festivals, from the point of view of organization, event management and people’s participation, set new and high standards. I have been noticing for the last two days that many people have uploaded pictures of the Simhastha Kumbh Mela. I would like the Tourism Department of the Government of India and the State Government to hold a photo competition on this occasion. People should be encouraged to take the finest photographs and upload them. What an atmosphere that would create. People will also come to know of the myriad and different activities going on in every corner of the Kumbh Mela. This can surely be done.
It’s true that I met the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh recently and he told me that they have laid special emphasis on cleanliness. It is not that the cleanliness remains confined to that place. People should carry back the message of cleanliness with them. I believe that even if the Kumbh Mela is a religious and spiritual occasion, we can turn it into a social occasion. We can turn it into an occasion of imbibing good values. It can become a reason to carry good resolutions and good habits to all the villages. We should use each Kumbh Mela to make people aware of how we can increase our value for water, our faith in water; how we can spread the message of water conservation. We should do this.
My dear fellow citizens, I will surely meet you all once in the evening on this important occasion of Panchayati Raj Divas today. My heartiest thanks to you all. As always, the unshakeable bond between your inner thoughts and those of mine gives me immense pleasure.
Many thanks!


20. MAY 22, 2016
My dear countrymen, namaskar!
Once again I have got an opportunity to talk to you about matters close to my heart, through ‘Mann Ki Baat’. For me, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is not a matter of ritual; I myself am very eager to talk to you. And I am really happy that I am able to connect with you all in every corner of India, through this programme ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I am grateful to All India Radio that they have also been successfully broadcasting ‘Mann Ki Baat’ in regional languages at 8 pm. I am also very happy that the people who listen to me, later communicate their feelings to me through letters, telephone calls, the website MyGov.in and also through the NarendraModiApp. A lot of what you say is of great help to me in the functioning of the government. How active should the government be in terms of public service? How much priority should be given to public welfare activities? In terms of these matters, this dialogue, this link that I have with you all, is of great use. I hope that you will now be even more actively and enthusiastically involved in ensuring that our democracy should function with people’s participation.
The summer heat is increasing day by day. We were hoping for some respite, instead we are experiencing continual rise in temperature. And in the midst of this came the information that the monsoon will perhaps be delayed by a week, which has added to the worry. Almost the entire country is reeling under the scorching impact of severe heat. The mercury continues to soar. Be it animals, birds or humans…everyone is suffering. These problems have been getting increasingly worse due to environmental degradation. Forest cover has kept receding due to indiscriminate felling of trees. In a way, the human race itself has paved the way for self-annihilation by destroying the environment.
5th June is World Environment Day. On this day, discussions expressing concern on the issue are held all over the world for saving the environment. This time on the occasion of World Environment Day, the United Nations has given the theme “Zero Tolerance for Illegal Wildlife Trade”. This topic will, of course, be discussed, but we also must talk about saving our flora and fauna, conserving water, and how to expand our forest cover. You must have seen in the last few days how forest fires raged in the lap of the Himalayas in Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir. The main cause of these forest fires was dry leaf littering combined with carelessness, which led to the massive inferno. And so, it becomes the bounden duty of each one of us, to save forests and save water.
Recently, I convered at length with the Chief Ministers of eleven states, reeling under severe drought- Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and, Odisha.
As per the conventional Government precedent, I could have had a combined meeting with all the drought affected states, but I chose not to do so. I had a one-on-one meeting with each state, devoting about two to two and a half hours with each one. I carefully heard what each state had to say. Usually such talks do not go beyond discussion on how much money was granted by the Central Government state-wise, and how much money was actually spent by each state. Thus, it came as a surprise even to the officers of the Central Government that some states have indeed made some very commendable efforts related to water, environment, tackling drought, caring for animals as well as affected human beings. Based on inputs from all corners of the country, irrespective of the ruling party there, we found that we had to give a thought to finding not only permanent solutions but also devising practical ways and means to deal with this long-standing problem. In a way, It was a kind of a learning experience too for me. And I have told the Niti Aayog that they should work on how to incorporate the best practices across all the states.
Some states, especially Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh have made full use of technology. I would like that in future, through the Niti Aayog, the exceptionally successful efforts of these states should be applied to other states also. People’s participation is a strong base for solving such problems. And for this, I believe that if there is a confluence of perfect planning, use of appropriate technology, and time-bound action, then we can achieve optimum results in drought management, for water conservation, to save every single drop of water. My faith is that water is a Gift from God. When we go to a temple, we are given an offering of Prasad and even if a small bit of that spills, we feel bad in our hearts. We not only pick it up but also pray five times for God’s forgiveness. Water is also an offering form the God. Even if a drop of water is wasted, then we should feel remorse and pain. And so water storage, water conservation and proper water irrigation are all of equal importance. And so there is need for implementing the maxim ‘Per Drop More Crop’ through Micro-Irrigation and cultivating crops that require minimal water intake. At present, it is indeed good news that in many states, even sugarcane farmers are using micro irrigation, some are using drip irrigation and some are using sprinklers. When I discussed with the eleven states, I noticed that even for cultivating paddy for production of rice, some of them had employed drip irrigation successfully and got higher yields, thereby also reducing the requirement for water as well as for labour. I also found that there were many states which had taken on very big targets, especially, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat- these three states have done massive work in the field of drip irrigation. And they are striving to bring every year 2 to 3 lakh hectares additional land under micro- irrigation. If this campaign gets underway in all the states, then not only will it benefit cultivation, but more water will also be conserved. Our farmer brothers in Telangana, through ‘Mission Bhagirathi’ have made a commendable effort to optimally use the waters of Godavari and Krishna rivers. In Andhra Pradesh, ‘Neeru Pragati Mission’ has been using technology for ground water recharging. People are devoting hard work and contributing financially as well to the mass movement that has been started in Maharashtra,. ‘Jal Yukt Shivir’ is one such people’s movement which is really going to be of great help in saving Maharashtra from water crisis in the future- this is what I feel. Chhattisgarh has started the ‘Lok-Suraj, Jal-Suraj’ campaign. Madhya Pradesh has started the ‘Balram Talaab Yojana’- and dug nearly 22,000 ponds, which is no small figure, work is also being carried out on their ‘Kapil Dhara Koop Yojana.’ In Uttar Pradesh there is ‘Mukhya Mantri Jal Bachao Abhiyaan’. In Karnataka water conservation efforts are in the form of ‘Kalyani Yojana’, under which they are trying to revive wells once again. In Rajasthan and Gujarat there are many ancient baodis – deep tanks or masonry wells with steps going down to the water. These states are making a very big effort to revive these as ‘water temples’. Rajasthan has started the Chief Minister’s Jal Swawalamban Abhiyan – Water Self Sufficiency Campaign. Jharkhand, although being a predominantly forest area, still has some parts which face water problem. They have launched a very big campaign for building ‘Check Dams’. They have started an exercise to check and stop the flow of water. Some states have started a campaign and made a number of small dams at distances of 10 to 20 kilometres in the rivers themselves to check the flow of water.
This is a wonderful experience. I urge the people of India that during this June, July, August September, we should resolve that we shall not let a single drop of water be wasted. We should decide right now upon the places where we can conserve water and where we can check the flow of water. The Almighty blesses us with water according to our needs, nature fulfils our needs. But if we become careless during the abundance of water and then during the lean water season land into trouble due to water scarcity, how can this be allowed? And the issue of water is not just for the farmers. This concerns everybody – the villages, the poor, the labourers, the farmers, the urban people, the country folk, the rich and the poor. And for this reason, now that the rainy season is approaching, saving water should be our priority. And when we celebrate Diwali this time, then we should also revel in how much water did we save; how much water we stopped from flowing out. You will see for yourselves that our joy will increase manifold. Water has this power, no matter how tired one is, just a bit of water splashed on the face makes one feel so refreshed. No matter how tired we are; when we see a large lake or an ocean, how magnificent that sight is. What a priceless treasure it is bestowed upon us by the Almighty! Just connect to it with your heart. Conserve it! We should harvest water. We should also store water. We should also modernise water irrigation. This I say as an earnest appeal. We should not let this season go waste. The coming four months should be transformed into a Save the Water Campaign, to save every drop of water. And this is not just for the governments, not just for the politicians, it is a work to be carried out by the people at large. Recently the Media reported about the water crisis in great detail. I hope that the Media will show the path to the people on how to save water, start a campaign, and also share the responsibility to free us from the water crisis forever; I invite then as well.
My dear Countrymen, we have to build a modern India. We have to make a transparent India. We have to make many services uniformly available across the entire country from one corner to another. So we will have to change some of our old habits as well. Today I want to touch upon one topic in which if you can be of help to me, then we can together achieve progress in that direction. We all know and we were taught about it in school that there was a time when there were no coins, no currency notes; there was a barter system. If you wanted vegetables you could give wheat in return. If you wanted salt, you could give vegetables in exchange. Business was carried out only through the barter system. Then gradually came currency, coins came, notes came. But now times have changed. The whole world is moving towards a cashless society. Through the facility of electronic technology, we can get money and also give money; we can buy things and pay our bills too. And with this there is no question of our wallets getting stolen from our pocket. We need not worry about keeping an account; the account will be maintained automatically. In the beginning it may appear to be a bit difficult, but once we get used to it, then this arrangement will seem very easy for us. And this possibility is there because under the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana that we have started recently, nearly all the families in the country have had their bank accounts opened. On the other hand, they have also got their Aadhar numbers. And the mobile phone has reached the hands of almost every Indian. So Jan Dhan, Aadhar and Mobile – Jam – J. A. M. Synchronising these three, we can move ahead towards a cashless society. You must have seen that along with the Jan Dhan account people have been given a RuPay card. In the coming days this card is going to be useful as both- a credit and a debit card. And now-a-days a very small instrument has come which is called ‘point of sale’- P. O. S. – ‘Pos’. With the help of that, be it your Aadhar number or your RuPay card, if you have to pay money to someone, you can do it through that. There is no need to take out any money from your pocket and count it; there is no need to carry around any cash with you. One of the initiatives in this regard taken by the Government of India is about how to make payments through ‘Pos’, how to receive money. The second endeavour we have started is Bank on Mobile. The ‘Universal Payment Interface’ banking transaction- UPI will change the way things work. It will become very easy to do money transactions through your mobile phone. And I’m happy to tell you that the N.P.C.I. and banks are working together to launch this platform through a mobile app. If this happens, perhaps you may not even need to carry a RuPay card with you.
Across the country, nearly 1.25 lakh young people have been recruited as banking correspondents. In a way we have worked towards providing the bank at your door step. Post offices have also been geared up for banking services. If we learn and adapt ourselves to use these services, then we will not require the currency, we will not need notes, we will not need coins. Businesses will function automatically, resulting in a certain transparency. Under-hand dealings will stop; the influence of black money will be reduced. So I appeal to my countrymen, that we should at least make a beginning. Once we start, we will move ahead with great ease. Twenty years ago who would have thought that so many mobiles would be in our hands. Slowly we cultivated a habit and now we can’t do without those. Maybe this cashless society assumes a similar form. But the sooner this happens, the better it will be.
My dear countrymen, whenever the Olympic games come around, and when these begin, we sit and clutch our heads and sigh, “we were left so far behind in the tally of gold medals… did we get a silver or not… should we do with just a bronze or not…” This happens. It is true that in the field of sports we face a lot of challenges. But an atmosphere for sports should be created in the country.
To encourage the sportspersons who are leaving for the Rio Olympics, to boost their morale, everyone should try in one’s own way. Someone could write a song, someone could draw cartoons, someone could send messages with good wishes, somebody could cheer a particular sport, but on the whole a very positive environment should be created in the entire country for these sportspersons. Whatever may be the result, a game is a game, one can win or lose, medals are won sometimes and sometimes not; our spirits should always soar high. And as I speak, I would like to mention our Sports Minister Shri Sarbanand Sonowal for a gesture that has touched my heart. Last week all of us were busy in the ups & downs of Assam election results. Shri Sarbanandji himself was leading the campaign. He was the Chief Ministerial candidate; but he was also the Union Minister. And I was very happy when I came to know that one day before the Assam election results, he discreetly reached Patiala in Punjab. You must be aware of the Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports- N.I.S. – where the sportspersons going for the Olympics are trained. They all are there. He suddenly reached there, much to the surprise of the sportspersons. And it was a matter of surprise for the world of sports as well, that a Minister personally cares for our sportspersons. What are the arrangements for them? How is the food? Are they getting nutritious food according to their needs or not? Are the appropriate trainers for their body fitness present there? Are all the training machines functioning properly? He surveyed everything in great detail. He personally inspected each and every sportsperson’s room. He spoke to all the players in great detail. He had a word with the management and trainers; he himself ate with the sportspersons. With election results being due, with the distinct possibility of a new responsibility as a Chief Minister, and yet if one of my colleagues, in the capacity of a Sports Minister, displays such concern for his work, then it gives me great joy. And I am confident that like this, we should all realize the importance of sports, we should encourage the people in the world of sports, encourage our sportspersons. This becomes a source of strength in itself, when the sportsperson feels that his 125 crore countrymen are with him, his morale gets boosted.
Last time I spoke to you about the FIFA Under 17 World Cup and recently I got to see the suggestions that have come pouring in. And these days I have noticed that a conducive atmosphere for Football can be seen in the whole country. Many people are taking an initiative to form their own teams. I have received thousands of suggestions on the NarendraModi Mobile App. Maybe many people don’t play the game themselves, but hundreds of thousands of young Indians have displayed such keen interest in the sport, this by itself was a very delightful experience for me. We all know the bond that India has with Cricket, but I saw the same passion for Football as well, and this by itself heralds a very positive signal for the future. For all the selected candidates for the Rio Olympics, and for our favourite sportspersons, we should create a cheerful and positive atmosphere. We should not judge everything in terms of victory and defeat. India should be known in the world for its spirit of sportsmanship. I appeal to my countrymen to contribute their bit in creating an atmosphere that boosts the spirits and enthusiasm of our athletes.
In the last week or so, results have been pouring in from all over the country…. and I am not talking about election results… I am talking about those students who slogged for the entire year, those of 10th and 12th Class. It is clear that our daughters are marching ahead triumphantly. It is a matter of joy. To those who have succeeded in these exams, I extend my congratulations and felicitations. And those who were not able to succeed, I would like to tell them once again that there is a lot to do in life. Life does not get stuck if we do not get results according to our expectations. We should live with hope, we should move ahead with confidence.
But I have been confronted with a new type of question, about which earlier I had never given a thought. I’ve received one email on MyGov.in site, which drew my attention. One Mr. Gaurav, Gaurav Patel of Madhya Pradesh writes that in the M.P. Board exam he has secured 89.33% marks. Reading this I felt elated. But in his continued narration, he tells us his tale of woes. Gaurav Patel says that Sir, afte securing 89.33% marks when I reached home, I was thinking that I would be congratulated by my family and friends, I would be applauded. But I was amazed when everybody in the house, friends and my teachers said the same thing, “Oh Dear, if your had secured just 4 more marks, you would have made it to 90%”. So it seems that my family, my friends, my teachers, nobody was pleased with my 89.33% marks. Everyone was lamenting that I missed my 90% by four marks. Now I’m perplexed and don’t know how to handle the situation. Is this all to life. Was what I did not good enough? Did I not prove myself? I don’t know but I feel a burden on my heart and mind.
Gaurav, I have read your letter very carefully. And I feel that perhaps this pain is not just yours; like you there are many lakhs and crores of other students who share the same pain. Because nowadays there is a trend that instead of finding satisfaction in what we have achieved, we tend to express our dissatisfaction in not achieving unrealistic goals. This is another form of negativity. We can never guide society towards the path of satisfaction if we always find dissatisfaction in everything. It would have been better if your family members, your class mates and your friends had appreciated your 89.33%. Then you would have felt motivated enough to do a lot more. I would like to urge guardians, parents and people all around, to please accept, welcome and express your satisfaction over your children’s results, and motivate them to surge ahead in life. Else, it might happen that a day will come when he brings 100% marks and you will say that, “you have got 100 percent! But still, had you done something more, it would have been better!” There is a limit to everything and that should be accepted.
Santosh Giri Goswami has written to me from Jodhpur something similar, almost along the same lines. He says that the people around him just don’t accept the results. They say that you should have done something better. There was a poem I had read long ago. I don’t remember the complete poem. The poet had written something like this – “I painted a picture of my anguish on the canvas of life. And when it was exhibited, almost all the visiting people commented that it needed some touching up. Someone said, ‘yellow here would have been better in place of blue.’ Someone said, ‘This line would have been better situated there instead of here.’ I wish some odd visitor had also shed a tear or two over the picture of my anguish.” I don’t remember if these were the exact words of the poem, as I read this poem way back. But nobody was able to grasp the pain depicted in that picture; everyone just spoke of touching it up.
Santosh Giriji, you have the same problem that Gaurav has. And there must be crores of students like you. You have the burden on yourself of fulfilling the expectations of millions of others. All that I would like to say to you is that in such a situation, don’t lose your balance. Everyone expresses their expectations; just keep listening, but stick to your point and make an effort to do something even better. But if you are not satisfied over what you have got, you will never be able to create something new. The strong foundation of one success becomes the foundation for another greater success. The dissatisfaction arising out of success never becomes a ladder to success; it guarantees failure. And so I would like to appeal that you should sing in celebration of the success that you have achieved. Possibilities of newer successes will arise out of success achieved earlier. I would like to appeal to parents, friends and neighbours that please don’t impose your expectations upon your children. And friends, does our life come to a standstill if we meet with failure sometimes. Sometimes one is not able to score good marks in exams, but he or she surges ahead in sports, or does well in music, or excels in the fine arts, or forges ahead in business. God has gifted each one of us with a unique talent. Please recognize your internal strength, build upon it and you will be able to march ahead. And this happens everywhere in life.
You must have heard of the musical instrument called santoor. There was a time when the santoor was associated with the folk music of the Kashmir valley. But it was Pandit Shiv Kumar (Sharma) whose magical touch transformed it into one of the prime musical instruments of the world. Shehnai once had a limited space in the world of music. It was mostly played at the threshold of the courts of emperors and kings. But Ustad Bismillah Khan’s mastery over the Shehnai made it one of the finest musical instruments in the world; it has now carved an identity of its own. And so you should stop worrying about what you have and how is that. Just concentrate on what you have and devote your utmost with that you are sure to reap handsome rewards.
My dear countrymen, sometimes I notice that the money that our poor families have to spend on their healthcare, throws their life off the track. It is true that while one has to spend little on preventing illness, the expenditure incurred on regaining health after you have fallen ill, is a lot more. Why can’t we lead life in such a way that we don’t ever fall sick and no financial burden falls upon the family. Cleanliness is one of the strongest protections from disease. The greatest service that can be rendered to the poor is by maintaining cleanliness. And the second thing that I constantly urge you to do is Yog. Some people also call it Yoga. 21st June is the International Day for Yog. People are not only attracted to Yog the world over, they have implicit faith in it and the whole world has embraced it. This is a priceless gift handed over to us by our ancestors, which we have given to the world. To the world which is filled with stress, Yog gives the power to lead a balanced life. Prevention is better than cure. A person practicing Yog, can easily have the achievements of staying healthy, maintaining balance, being richly endowed with a strong will power, nurturing supreme self confidence and to have concentration in every task one does. 21st June, International Yog Day is not just a mere event. It should spread wide, it should find a place in every person’s life. Each person should take 20-25-30 minutes out from his daily routine and spend it on practicing Yog. And for this, the International Yog day on 21st June gives us the inspiration. These collective occasions do become a reason for effecting positive change in an individual’s life. I do hope that on 21st June, wherever you may be, please take the initiative; you have a month with you. If you visit the website of the Government of India, the syllabus for this time, which ‘asanas’ you have to do, how one has to do them, all that has been described in it. Have a look at it. Do get these followed in your village, in your mohallas, in your city, in your school, in your institution, even in offices. Start it from now, one month in advance and you will be a participating partner on 21st June. I have read it several times that there are offices where on a regular basis, when they first meet in the morning, they begin with Yog and Pranayam and the efficiency of the entire office increases. The whole culture of the office gets transformed and the environment also undergoes a positive change. Can we make use of 21st June to bring Yog into our lives? Can we use it to bring Yog into our social life? Can we use it to bring Yog into our surroundings? I will be going this time to Chandigarh to participate in the programme on 21st June. I shall be doing Yog with the people of Chandigarh. You too must connect yourself with it when the whole world will be doing Yog on that day. I urge you all not to get left behind. Your staying healthy is very important to make India healthy.
My dear country men, through Mann Ki Baat, I connect with you regularly. I had given all of you a mobile number earlier, which you could use for listening to ‘Mann Ki Baat’ by giving a missed call on that number. But now we have made it a lot simpler. Now, to be able to listen to this programme, all you have to do is to dial just four digits. That four digit number is 1-9-2-2 . I repeat …One- Nine- Two -Two. By giving a missed call on this number, you will be able to listen to ‘Mann Ki Baat’ at any time, wherever you are and in any language of your choice.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar to all of you once again! Please don’t forget what I had said about water. You will remember it, won’t you? Okay! Thank You. Namaste!




21. JUNE 26, 2016
My dear countrymen, my greetings (namaskar) to you all
Last year, we had to endure so many trials – the scorching heat of the summer, scarcity of water, drought conditions and so on. However, the past two weeks have been the harbinger of the welcome news of rainfall from different places, bringing in its wake a feeling of freshness. You too must have felt it. Going by the predictions of the scientists, this time there should be good rainfall, far and wide and throughout the rainy season. This news in itself charges us with a lot of enthusiasm. I extend my greetings to all our farmer brethren hoping for a bountiful rainfall.
In our country, like the toiling farmers, our scientists are also achieving success on many fronts to take our country to new heights. I have believed it right from the beginning that the new generation should nurture the dream of becoming scientists, should have keen interest in Science, and our youngsters should step forward with the zeal to do something for the coming generations. I also want to share another bright news with you. Yesterday I had gone to Pune, on the occasion of the anniversary of the Smart City Project. Over there I met those students of the Pune College of Engineering, who on their own have made a satellite, which was launched on 22nd June. I had called them to meet me, as I had a wish to see these young friends of mine, to interact with them and to experience firsthand the energy and enthusiasm within them. For the past many years, several students have made their contributions to this project. In a way, this academic satellite is a living example of the soaring flight of courage and ambition of the young India. That has led these our students to make this satellite. The dreams behind this small satellite are big and lofty; they soar high into the sky; the efforts put in by them are very intense. On similar lines as achieved by these Pune students, the students of Satyabhama University of Chennai in Tamil Nadu also created their satellite; and their SathyabamaSAT has also been launched. We have been hearing these things since childhood, and every child wishes deep inside his heart to touch the sky and grab a few stars. Keeping this in mind, in my opinion, these two satellites made by the students and launched by ISRO, are extremely important and most valuable. All these students deserve hearty congratulations. I also want to congratulate the people of the country that on 22nd June, our scientists at ISRO launched 20 satellites simultaneously into space, and in the process set a new record, breaking their own previous records. And this is also a matter of joy that of the twenty satellites which were launched in India, 17 satellites were from other countries. Along with America, the satellites of many other countries were launched on Indian soil by Indian scientists and along with these, those two satellites made by our students also reached outer space. And it is also noteworthy that owing to its guarantee of success with lesser cost, ISRO has carved its special place in the world. And for this very reason, many countries of the world are today looking towards India for the launching of their satellites.
My dear Countrymen, “Save the Girl Child, Educate the Girl Child” (Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao), has already become the Mann Ki Baat, the heartfelt wish of all the people of India. Still, some incidents infuse a new life into this slogan. This time in the results of 10th and 12th classes, our daughters have been doing wonderfully well, which is a matter of pride. And my dear countrymen, there is another significant event that all of us should take pride in. On 18th June, the Indian Air Force for the very first time inducted its first batch of women fighter pilots. You get goose pimples just at the mention of ‘women fighter pilots’; we feel so proud that these three Flying Officer daughters of ours- Avni Chaturvedi, Bhawna Kanth and Mohana, have achieved this great feat. What these three daughters have accomplished is truly special. Flying Officer Avni is from Rewa in Madhya Pradesh, Flying Officer Bhawana is from Begusarai in Bihar and Flying Officer Mohana is from Vadodara in Gujarat. You must have noticed that all these three daughters do not hail from metro cities of India. They do not even come from the capital cities of their respective states. Despite hailing from small cities and towns, they nurtured dreams as high as the sky, and they also made them come true. I extend my heartiest wishes to these three daughters Avni, Bhawana and Mohana as well as their parents.
My dear Countrymen, a few days ago on 21st June, the whole world organised grand shows in observance of the anniversary of the International Day for Yoga. As an Indian, when we witness the entire world coming together through Yoga, we realize that the entire world is getting linked with our past, present and future. We are forging a unique bond with the rest of the world. In India too, the International Yoga Day was celebrated at over 1 lakh places, with a lot of fervour and enthusiasm in myriad forms and hues, and in an atmosphere of gaiety. I also got an opportunity to perform Yoga in Chandigarh amidst thousands of Yoga lovers. It was worth watching the zeal of the young and old alike. You must have seen that last week the Indian government issued a postage stamp on ‘Surya Namaskar’ on the occasion of International Yoga Day. This time, people all over the world, on Yoga Day, were witness to two special events. One was at New York City where the United Nations Organisation -UNO Head Quarters building is located. A special projection depicting different postures of the various yoga asanas was organized on top of that building. And passersby kept taking pictures of these, and these pictures soon were being shared all over the world. Tell me, which Indian would not feel proud at such happenings? One more interesting thing happened. Technology is at work. Social media has created an identity of its own. And this time Twitter carried out a light hearted pleasant experiment in Yoga with its ‘Yoga imaging’. As soon as we typed ‘hash tag yoga day’, we would immediately get a picture of a yoga image on our mobile. And this image too went viral all over the world. Yoga by itself means adding – getting connected. Yoga has the power to connect the entire world. But for that to happen, first all of us need to get connected to Yoga.
Swati Srivastava from Satna in Madhya Pradesh, called me up on telephone after the Yoga Day and left a message for all of you but it seems that it pertains more to me: –
Sound Byte: “I wish that my entire country should be healthy and all the poor people also should remain free from diseases. For this I want that among the many ads that are played on Doordarshan, there should be one ad on Yoga, how it is to be done, and what are its benefits?”
Swati ji, your suggestion is very good, but if you observe carefully you will notice that not just on Doordarshan, but these days in India and outside India too, the Indian T.V. channels and channels of other countries are pitching in with their contribution to propagate Yoga. They all are shown at different times, but if you watch carefully, all these things are being done to disseminate information about Yoga. And I have seen that there are some countries in the world which have T.V. channels exclusively dedicated to Yoga 24 hours a day. And you probably know that, during the month of June, in view of the International Yoga Day, I used to share a video everyday of one particular asana of Yoga through Twitter and Face Book. If you go to the website of the Ministry of Ayush, you will see available there a 40-45 minutes very good video demonstrating one after another, different kinds of yog asanas for different parts of the body that you can do, people of all ages can do. To you and through you to all the people interested in Yoga, I would like to exhort to get connected to it.
This time I have made an appeal. When we say that Yoga is a way to rid oneself of illnesses, then why don’t we bring together all the different schools of thought of Yoga, which have their own methods, their own priorities and their own experiences. But all of them share the same final goal. All the prevalent systems of Yoga, all the functioning Yoga institutions, all the different Yoga Gurus, I have urged all of them to run a successful campaign this entire year on how to defeat Diabetes through Yoga. Can we control Diabetes through Yoga? Some people have been successful in that. Everyone has searched for a wayin this regard. And we know that there is no definite cure for Diabetes. One has to manage it with medicines. Diabetes is the master switch that triggers all other illnesses. It becomes an entrance for many other diseases. And so everyone is wary of Diabetes. A lot of people have worked in this direction. Some diabetic patients have also been able to control it thorough their yogic practice. Why don’t we share our experiences with other people to impart a momentum to this endeavour and create a kind of atmosphere for it for an entire year? I urge you to use– “Hashtag Yoga Fights Diabetes” I repeat- “Hashtag Yoga Fights Diabetes”. Use this Twitter handle and share your experiences on social media. Or send them to me on NarendraModiApp. Let us see what the various experiences are. At least, give it a try. I invite you to share your experiences on “Hashtag Yoga Fights Diabetes”.
My dear countrymen, sometimes my ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is ridiculed a lot and is criticized much also. However, this can only happen because all of us are committed to democracy. But today, as I speak to you on 26th June, and I want to especially say this to the new generation that this democracy that we take pride in, this democracy that has granted great power to us, every citizen has been empowered… but 26th June 1975 was also a day… the night of 25th June and the next morning, was a dark hour for the democracy of India when Emergency was imposed in India. All the rights of the citizens were suspended. The country was turned into a prison. Lakhs of people along with Jai Prakash Narain, thousands of leaders, many organisations were put behind bars. Many books have been written on that dark period. Many discussions have been held on it. But today, as I talk to you all on 26th June, we should not forget that our strength lies in our democracy. Our strength lies in the people’s power. Our strength lies in each and every citizen of our country. We have to carry forward this commitment and make it stronger. And it is this people’s power which has sustained democracy as its living embodiment. There might have been locks on newspaper houses, radio might have been speaking just one kind of language, still on the other hand, given the opportune moment, the citizens give an example of the power of Democracy. A great example of the democratic strength of the common people was witnessed during Emergency. And we must keep reminding our country of its democratic strength from time to time. And our endeavour should be to make people aware of their power and to always have the tendency to further strengthen it by linking more and more people to it. I always stress that Democracy doesn’t merely mean that people vote for you and give you the contract to run this country for five years. Certainly Not! Voting is certainly an important component but there are many other facets of democracy. And the biggest dimension is that of people’s participation, their attitude, their thinking. And the more the governments get connected with the people, the stronger they become. The chasm between the governments and the people leads to ruin. My endeavour has always been to ensure that the nation moves forward on the strength of people’s participation.
Recently, when my government completed two years of functioning, some young people of modern thinking suggested, “When you talk such big things about democracy, then why don’t you get your government rated by the people also.” In a way it had a tone of challenge as well as advice. But that stirred my mind. I raised this topic with some of my senior colleagues. Their first reaction was, “Oh no! Sir! What are you thinking of doing? These days technology has changed so much that if people get together and form a group and if they decide to misuse technology, then who knows in which direction they might take forward this survey.” They thus expressed their concern. But I felt, “No, we should go ahead even if it is a risk. We should give it a try and see what happens. Now a lot of surveys are conducted after the elections, during the elections, at other times also over some issues, sometimes to gauge the popularity, but the sample size of these surveys is not very big. However, my dear countrymen, I am happy to state that when I, through the medium of technology, using different languages, appealed to the masses to rate my government, a lot of people amongst you have expressed your opinion on ‘rate-my-government-MyGov. In.’ Lakhs of you displayed your interest in this but 3 lakh people devoted their time and put in serious effort for giving an answer to each and every question. I am grateful to these 3 lakh people that they displayed a lot of self initiative in rating the government. I won’t discuss the results. Our media persons are sure to do that. But I can say for sure that it was a good experiment. And this was a matter of joy for me that people speaking all the languages of India, residing in every corner of the country, hailing from all types of background… all of them participated in it. And the biggest thing was… and this, of course, came as a surprise to me… that maximum number of people took part in this exercise through the portal of the website of the Rural Employment Scheme which is being run by the government. Thus, my primary impression is that there has been a large and active participation of people connected to rural India and poverty issues. This I liked the most. So you have seen that while on 26th June some years ago the voice of the people was stifled, now is the time, when the people make their decisions, they judge whether the government is doing the right thing or not, is performing well or poorly. This is the real power of democracy.
My dear countrymen, today I want to make a special appeal for one thing. There was a time when taxes were so pervasive, that it became a habit to avoid taxation. There was a time when there were many restrictions imposed on bringing foreign goods into the country which gave rise to a lot of smuggling. But gradually, times have changed. Now it is not very difficult for the taxpayer to get connected with the taxation system of the government. But even then, old habits die hard. One generation still feels that it is best to keep away from the government. Today I want to impress upon you that we end up losing our peace of mind by trying to escape from rules and regulations. As a result, anybody can trouble and harass us. Why should we let this happen? Why don’t we, on our own, give the correct details of our income and property to the government, so that we can rid ourselves from the burden of hitherto undeclared assets? I appeal to the countrymen to do this. To the people who have undisclosed income, the Government of India has given a chance to declare such income. The government has presented before the country a special facility to disclose undisclosed income by the 30th of September.
We can be free ourselves of various burdens just by paying a fine. I have also promised that for those who voluntarily declare to the government their assets and their undisclosed income, then the government will not conduct any kind of enquiry. Not once will it be asked as to from where all this wealth came and how it was acquired. And so, this is a good chance for you to become a part of a transparent system. At the same time, I want to tell the people of the country that please consider this plan, which is up to 30th September as your last chance. In between, I had even told the Members of the Parliament that after 30th September if any citizen is put through any difficulty, the one who does not want to follow due rules of government, then it will not be possible to help them. I want to say this to the people of the country that we do not wish that after the 30th September anything should happen that will cause difficulties for you. And so I say that please avail of this facility before this date and save yourselves from any possible trouble after the 30th of September.
My dear countrymen, I had to talk about this in Mann Ki Baat today because recently I held a two-day conclave with the Revenue Departments- all the officials of the Income Tax, Customs and Excise Departments. And I have told them in clear words that we should not perceive citizens as crooks. We should have trust and faith in the citizens. We should hold hands with them. If they want to follow rules, we should encourage them, and lovingly help them cross over. It is important to build an atmosphere of trust. We shall have to bring about a change through our conduct. We shall have to reassure the taxpayer. I stressed this upon them and I noticed that they too realized that today when the nation is surging ahead, all of us must contribute to it. And when I was taking inputs from them in this conclave, I gathered information which I want to share with you as well. None of you will believe that in a country of 125 crore people, one and a half, only one and a half lakh people exist, whose taxable income is more than 50 lakh rupees. Nobody will be able to swallow something like this. People having a taxable income of more than 50 lakh rupees can be seen in big cities in large numbers. Just looking at their bungalows worth 1 or 2 crores, one wonders how they can be in a tax bracket of less than 50 lakhs. This means that there is something wrong somewhere. We have to change this situation. And this has to change before 30th September. Before taking any extreme steps, the government must give a chance to the people. And so my dear brothers and sisters, this is a golden chance for you to disclose your undisclosed income. And in another way, this is the way out to save yourself from any trouble that could arise after 30th September. I urge you to come forth in this task for the betterment of our country, for the upliftment of the poor. And I do not want that you should face any problems after 30th September.
My dear countrymen, the common man of this country is always looking for a chance to do something for the country. When I asked the people to give up their cooking gas subsidy, more than 1 crore families of this country voluntarily gave up their subsidy. And now I want to cite an example especially for those people who have undisclosed income. Yesterday when I went to Pune for the Smart City programme, over there I got the chance to meet Shri Chandrakant Damodar Kulkarni and his family. I had called them especially to meet me. And what was the reason? Anyone who has ever evaded tax, my words may or may not inspire that person, but the example of Shri Chandrakant Kulkarni is sure to inspire him. Do you know what the reason is? Shri Chandrakant Kulkarni is an ordinary man who belongs to an average middle class family. He used to work for the government. Then he retired. He receives a pension of sixteen thousand rupees. And my dear countrymen, you will be surprised to hear, and those who are in the habit of evading tax will get a shock to know that Chandrakant Kulkarni Ji, who gets a pension of only rupees sixteen thousand, some time back wrote a letter to me saying that out of his pension of 16,000, he voluntarily wants to donate Rs. 5000 per month for the Cleanliness Campaign. And not just this, he sent me 52 cheques, post dated, which bear a date for each forthcoming month. We certainly do not have any right to evade tax in this country where there is one such government employee, who after retirement, out of a pension of mere sixteen thousand rupees, gives five thousand for the Cleanliness Campaign. No one could be a greater source of inspiration than Chandrakant Kulkarni. And for the people who are associated with the Cleanliness Campaign also, there could be no better inspiring example than Chandrakant Kulkarni. I called Chandrakantji face to face. I met him and his life has touched my heart. I express my felicitations and admiration for the Kulkarni family, I congratulate them. And surely there must be countless people like them about whom I have no information. These are the very people… and this is the power and strength of the masses. A man with a pension of sixteen thousand rupees sends me cheques worth two lakhs, sixty thousand in advance, is this a small thing? Come, let us search deep down inside our hearts, and ponder over the fact that the government has given us an opportunity to disclose our incomes. While thinking of Chandrkant Kulkarni, let us also follow him.
My dear countrymen, Santosh Negi from Pauri Garhwal in Uttarakhand, has called up to relate one of his experiences. He has given a message regarding water conservation. Friends, his experience can be of use to you as well: –
Sound Byte: “Drawing inspiration from you, in our school, before the onset of monsoon we dug 250 small trenches which were 4 feet deep, along the side of the playground, so that rainwater could be collected in these. This way the play ground remained unspoilt and there was no danger of children drowning in these… and we managed to save crores of litres of rainwater which fell on the playfield.”
Santoshji, I would like to thank you for sending me this message. Pauri Garhwal is a hilly area where you have done such splendid work. You deserve congratulations for that. The people of our country should certainly enjoy the rains but let us also be mindful that this is a holy gift from the Almighty. This is a limitless wealth. We should make every effort to conserve every single drop of water. How can we retain the rainwater of the villages there itself and similarly preserve rainwater of cities therein. To recharge Mother Earth once again, how can we replenish water back to the earth? If there is water today, only then can there be a tomorrow. Water is the basis of all life. An atmosphere has certainly been created in the country. Lately, in all the states a lot of measures have been taken for water conservation. But now that we are going to have the bounty of rain water, we must see to it that it doesn’t just flow away. We are so concerned about saving lives; we should be equally concerned about saving water.
My dear countrymen, you already know that number 1922 …it must have become a part of your memory by now. … 1-9-2-2 . This 1922 is one such number that if you give a missed call to it, you can listen to Mann Ki Baat in the language of your choice. By listening to Mann Ki Baat, at the time of your convenience, in the language of your choice, you too can make up your mind and resolve to contribute to the journey of the nation’s progress.
My namaskar once again to all my countrymen, Thank You.


22. JULY 31, 2016
My dear countrymen, Namaskar!
Early this morning, I had an opportunity to spend some time with some young people from Delhi. And I believe, in the days to come, the spirit and fervor of sports will envelop every young person in the country. All of us know that in a few days time, the world’s largest sports event, the biggest sports carnival will take place. RIO is going to resound in our ears time and again. The entire world will be at play… every country in the world will keep a close watch on the performance of its sportspersons; you too will be doing the same. All of us harbour a lot of hopes and expectations, but keeping the morale of our sports contingent at RIO high is also the solemn duty of us 1.25 billion countrymen. In Delhi this morning, the Government of India had organised a very good event, ‘Run for RIO’, ‘Play and Live’, ‘Play and Blossom’. In the days to come, wherever we are, let us do our bit to encourage our sportspersons. A sportsperson, who makes it to this stage, does so after putting in a lot of hard work. It’s a kind of severe and dedicated ‘tapasya’. However much one cherishes all kinds of food, one has to sacrifice that. However much one would like to snuggle up in warmth during a harsh winter, one has to just get up and leave for the track and field. And this happens not just to the players. Even their parents leave no stone unturned for the sake of their children. Sportsperson are not made overnight; it takes long and sustained perseverance to attain that stature. Victory and defeat are certainly important, but what is even more important is reaching this level in a game or sports discipline and, therefore, let all of us Indians join hands in wishing our RIO contingent the very best. I’m also ready to do this on your behalf; the prime minister of the country is ready to be a postman to convey your good wishes to these players. Do send your best wishes to our sportspersons in Rio on the ‘NarendraModi App’. I’ll convey these to our contingent. Just like 1.25 billion Indians I too as a citizen would like to join you in encouraging them, cheering them up. Come, over the next few days, let us try to the fullest extent possible to make each one of our sportspersons feel proud, to reward them for their endeavours and exertions; and today, as I speak on the Rio Olympics, I would like to mention the name of a poetry lover, Suraj Prakash Upadhyay a student of the Punjab Central University, who has sent me a poem. It’s possible that many poets would have written poems, some may be planning to write, some may even compose their verses into songs, in all languages. But here I would like to share with you the poem sent by Suraj Ji.
”The games bugle’s been sounded
The festivities of competitions
In this mega sporting odyssey
Amidst the melodious chimes of RIO
May India commence on a grand note
May it rain gold, silver and bronze!
May India commence on a grand note
May it rain gold, silver and bronze!
May the turn be ours also this time
May we be amply prepared this time
Set your sight straight at the Gold
But let a loss not deject you
You are a hero to a billion hearts
You are the heartbeat of your sport
March ahead and set records
Let our tricolour flutter with pride in RIO
Let our tricolour flutter with pride in RIO.
Suraj Ji, I dedicate your sentiments to all our sportspersons and extend to them the warmest and heartiest wishes from my side and on behalf of us 1.25 billion countrymen, that our tricolour indeed flutters with joy and pride in the skies of RIO.
A young man Mr. Ankit has reminded me of the death anniversary of President Abdul Kalamji, which was observed last week. The country, in fact the world paid glowing tributes to him. The mere mention of Abdul Kalamji’s name brings to mind vivid images of science, technology, missiles – in fact the entire spectrum of strengths and capabilities of India in the days to come. And that’s why Ankit asks me… What is your government doing to ensure that Abdul Kalamji’s dreams come true? You are right. The future is going to be technology driven. And technology is extremely dynamic. Day by day, technology keeps updating, changes form, transforms its impact. You cannot shackle technology. If you strive to hold it still, it would move beyond your grasp assuming new looks and forms. If we have to match its strides and move ahead, research and innovation are the keys, these are its lifelines and moving spirit. In the absence of research and innovation, technology will become a burden, just as still water stagnates and even stinks. And if we go on just using old technology without recourse to research and innovation, we will become outdated in this rapidly changing world and age. And that is why the government too has taken steps to attract the new generation toward science and research & innovation in the field of technology. And that is why I say ‘let us aim to innovate’. And when I say “let us aim to innovate’ my AIM stands for “Atal Innovation Mission’. This Mission is being promoted by the Niti Aayog. The purpose is to create an eco-system in the entire country through the Atal Innovation Mission, to forge a vibrant chain of innovation, experiment and entrepreneurship, which would also enhance the possibilities of new employment generation. If we have to develop the next generation innovators, we shall have to link our children with it. And that is why the Government of India has taken the initiative of ‘Atal Tinkering Labs’. Wherever such Tinkering Labs are established in schools, those would be given 10 Lakh rupees and further 10 Lakh rupees will be provided for maintenance during the period of five years. Similarly, innovations are directly connected to Incubation Centres. If we have strong and well-equipped Incubation Centres, a system comes into place for innovations, for start-ups, for experimentation and to bring these efforts to a certain level. Creation of new Incubation Centres is essential just as it is necessary to strengthen the older Incubation Centres. And when I talk of Atal Incubation Centres, the government has considered allocating the huge sum of 10 crore rupees for this also. India is grappling with diverse challenges. We see problems in daily life. We shall now have to look for technological solutions for these. Through the ‘Atal Grand Challenges’ we have exhorted the young generation of the country that if they see problems, they should search for solutions taking the path of technology, doing research, applying innovations and bring those on board. The Government of India wants to specially reward technology developed to find solutions to our problems. And I am happy that people have evinced interest in these things. When we spoke of Tinkering Labs, about 13 thousand schools applied and when we talked of Incubation Centres, over four thousand academic and non-academic institutions came forward. I firmly believe that the real tribute to Abdul Kalamji will consist of harnessing research and innovation for developing technology to find solutions to problems we face in day to day life, and ridding us of the difficulties we face to make things easier for us all. The more the new generation devotes itself to this task, the greater will be their contribution with immense significance for the modern India of the 21st century. That will be the real tribute to Abdul Kalamji.
My dear countrymen, while some time ago, we were concerned about a drought like situation, these days, on the one hand, we are enjoying the rains, but on the other, reports of floods are also coming in. Central government and State Governments are working hand in hand with their utmost efforts to provide relief and assistance to the flood-affected. Despite causing some hardships, rains make every human heart rejoice since rains, and agriculture, are the focal point of our entire sphere of economic activities.
There are times when one has to face an illness that leaves a scar for a lifetime. But if we are aware, alert and active, the prevention is also very easy. Take the case of Dengue. It is preventable. Pay attention to cleanliness, be alert, try and be safe and take special care of children. And the mindset that such diseases strike poor neighborhoods only, is not valid in the case of Dengue. Dengue first enters affluent localities and we should try and understand it. You must be watching advertisements on TV but there are times when we neglect taking proactive and informed action on it. The government, hospitals, doctors will of course do their job, but I urge that we should also be alert in ensuring that Dengue doesn’t enter our homes, locality, family, for that matter, any illness connected with stagnant water.
I would like to draw the attention of my dear countrymen to another menace. In today’s fast paced, rat race of life, at times we don’t have time to think about ourselves. When we fall sick, we want to get well as soon as possible and as a result pop in just any antibiotic that we can lay our hands on. It may give you instant relief, but my dear countrymen, this random pill popping habit can land you in deep trouble. It may give you temporary succor, but we should completely stop taking antibiotics without the advice of a doctor. Avoid it till a doctor gives you a prescription. Do not use the short cut method; it can lead to serious complications. Although random and rampant use of antibiotics gives immediate relief to the patient, but gradually the disease causing bacteria get accustomed to that drug. The drug then loses its efficacy and one has to fight the battle anew, develop new medicines, do new research; it takes years and till then these diseases create other complications. That’s why we have to be very aware about that. One more problem has presented itself. Suppose the doctor advises that brother, take this antibiotic and he tells that 15 tablets of that to be taken over a period of five days. I urge you to complete the entire course of medication as prescribed by the doctor. Because if the treatment is abandoned halfway, it would benefit the bacteria. If the medicine is taken more than what is required, that too would be in the favour of the bacteria. And that is why, it is utmost essential to take the entire course of antibiotic medicine in terms of number of tablets as well as days. If we leave the treatment halfway due to improvement in our condition, we are only helping that bacteria getting more sturdy and difficult to treat. Microbes spreading TB and malaria are bringing about rapid mutations in themselves, rendering medicines ineffective. In medical parlance it is called antibiotic resistance. Hence it is indeed necessary to follow rules in the administration of antibiotics. The government is committed to prevent antibiotic resistance. You must have seen, these days, on the antibiotic medicine strips there is a red line to make you aware. You must pay attention to that.
While we are on the subject of health, I would like to talk about one more issue. I feel very concerned about the lives of pregnant women of our country. In our country, close to 3 crore women become pregnant every year but some of these mothers die during childbirth. Sometimes the mother loses her life, at times the infant does. There are times when both die. It is true that in the last decade there has been a decline in maternal mortality rates but even now, we are not able to save the lives of a large number of pregnant women. Anemia during or after pregnancy, pregnancy related infections, high BP, any such complication can have devastating effect. Keeping in view these issues, in the last few months, the Government of India has launched a new campaign ‘Prime Minister Safe Motherhood Campaign’. Under this, on the 9th of every month, all pregnant women will get a check-up at government health centers free of cost. I urge all poor families to ensure that all pregnant women avail of this benefit on the 9th of every month, so that if by the time they reach the 9th month any complication arises, it can be dealt with suitably in time and the lives of both mother and child can be saved. I have specially asked the gynecologists whether they could offer their services free on the 9th of every month, for the sake of under privileged mothers! Can’t my doctor brothers and sisters spare just 12 days in a year for this service to the under privileged? Over the last few days, many have written to me. There are thousands of doctors who have implemented what I said. But India is such a vast country. We need lakhs of doctors to join this campaign. I do believe that you will indeed do so.
My dear countrymen, today, the whole world is concerned deeply about climate change, global warming and the environment. These are discussed collectively in the country and across the world. In India, this has been accorded great importance for centuries. In the battlefield of Kurukshetra too, Bhagwan Shri Krishna talks of trees. Showing concern towards trees even in the midst of a battle, underlines how much importance was attached to trees. In the Gita, Bhagwan Shri Krishna says, ‘ashwatth sarvvrikshanam’ which means amongst all trees, I am the Peepal Tree. It is proclaimed in Shukracharya Neeti that ‘naastimulam anaushadham’ meaning that there is no plant that does not have medicinal values; the Anushasan Parv of the Mahabharta elaborates this concept at greater length. It is stated in the Anushasan Parv that whosoever plants a tree begets an offspring in the form of that tree. There can be no doubt about this fact. He who donates a tree, that tree in return becomes a ladder to salvation just like children. Therefore it is appropriate that parents desiring their well-being should plant tree and rear them like their own children.
Our scriptures like Gita, Shukracharya Niti and Anushasan Parv of the Mahabharta contain such lofty ideals. However, there are certain individuals in the present generation also, who live up to these ideals. A few days ago, I came across a mention of Sonal, a young daughter from Pune. It touched my heart. It is mentioned in Anushasan Parv in Mahabharata that a tree is like an offspring and becomes means of salvation in after life, Sonal has not only taken it upon herself to fulfill her parents’ wishes but society’s expectations also. Shri Khandu Maruti Mhatre, a farmer of Narayanpur village of of Junner Taluka of Pune got his granddaughter Sonal married in a very inspiring manner. What did Mhatre Ji do in Sonal’s marriage? He gifted all his relatives, guests and friends with a sapling of ‘Kesar’ variety of mango. I saw a picture of this marriage in social media. I was surprised to see that in the marriage festivities, instead of members of the wedding party, saplings were more visible! That picture really touches one’s heart. I think that Sonal, who herself is an agriculture graduate, came upon this idea. And to present Mango saplings in the marriage, just think, reflects the love for nature in a brilliant manner. In a way, Sonal’s marriage in an everlasting story of love for nature, I congratulate Sonal and Shriman Mhatre Ji for this innovative effort. And such experiments are done by many people. I remember, when I was the Chief Minister of Gujarat – the temple of Ambaji there is visited in the month of Bhadrapad by lakhs of devotees travelling by foot. A certain NGO decided to distribute saplings as ‘Prasad’ to the devotees, and the devotees were told that Mata Ambaji will keep on showering her grace, if they took care of the saplings, till their maturity into trees in their homes and villages. And lakhs of such saplings were distributed to the devotees traveling on foot to Ambaji temple that year. Other temples too can start the practice of distributing saplings instead of ‘prasad’ during this rainy season. It can easily grow into a people’s movement for planting trees. I repeatedly tell my farmer brethren that instead of wasting our land in building fences around our fields, why don’t we start planting timber trees there. Today India has to spend billions and trillions of rupees to import timber wood from abroad for construction of houses and furniture. If we plant on the boundaries of our fields timber trees that can be utilised for construction of homes and furniture and which can also be cut and sold after 15 to 20 years with the permission of the government. This way, not only can these become a new source of your income, but can also save India from importing timber.
Some days ago, a few states taking advantage of this weather have started many campaigns in this direction and the Government of India has also passed CAMPA law, under which about 40 thousand crores rupees will go to the states for planting trees. I have been told that the Maharashtra government planted about 2 crores sapling in the entire state on 1st July and next year they have taken a pledge to plant about 3 crores trees. The Maharashtra government has transformed this activity into a people’s movement. Rajasthan, desert area, has celebrated Van Mahotsav in a very big way and pledged to plant 25 lakhs trees. To plant 25 lakhs of sapling in Rajasthan is not a small matter! Those who know the soil conditions of Rajasthan would know how mammoth this task is going to be. Andhra Pradesh, too has decided to increase its green cover by 50% by the year 2029. Under the central government’s ongoing ‘Green India Mission’, Railways too have joined in this endeavour. Gujarat too has an illustrious tradition of observing Van Mahotsav. This year Gujarat has undertaken many projects like ‘Aamra Van’, ‘Ekata Van’ and ‘Shaheed Van’ as a part of Van Mahotsav and launched a campaign to plant crores of trees. I am not able to mention every state but all deserve to be appreciated.
My dear countrymen, I had the opportunity to visit South Africa for the first time some time back. During a foreign visit, diplomacy is practiced, there are trade deliberations, discussions about security and as is customary, many MoUs are concluded. But for me the visit to South Africa was more like a pilgrimage. When we think of South Africa, it is very natural to remember Mahatma Gandhi and Nelson Mandela. Whenever we hear the words – non-violence, love and forgiveness, the inspiring faces of Gandhi and Mandela appear before us. During my South Africa tour, I visited Phoenix settlement where Mahatma Gandhi’s home is known as ‘Sarvodaya’. I also had the good fortune of traveling from Pietermaritzburg station in the train in which Mahatma Gandhi had travelled, and which was the site of the incidence that sowed the seed of the transformation of a Mohandas into Mahatma Gandhi. But what I want to tell you is the fact that this time I had an opportunity to meet those great men who had devoted their young lives for society fighting shoulder to shoulder with Nelson Mandela for the ideals of equality and equal opportunity; who had spent 20 to 22 years of their lives in prison with Nelson Mandela, effectively sacrificing the entire period of their youth for the society. I had the privilege of meeting these grat personalities, these close associates of Nelson Mandela such as Shriman Ahmed Kathrada, Shriman Laloo Chiba, Shriman George Bizos and Ronnie Kasrils. All were Indian by origin but dedicated themselves to wherever they settled and decided to offer their lives for those amidst whom they lived. So much strength they had! And the greatest thing was that while I was talking to them and listening about the experiences of their imprisonment, they had no bitterness or ill will for anyone. There was not a single trace of desire, to get something, to become somebody even after living such a great life of ‘Tapasaya’. The essence of performing one’s duty as explained in Gita was embodied in their persona. I will remember that meeting forever. Equality and equal opportunity are the two biggest ‘mantras’ for any society and government. Equality and equal opportunity, compassion and fraternity, these are the paths leading us to a bright future. We all want a good future for our children. Everybody has different needs and different priorities but there is one common path of development, equality, compassion and fraternity. Come, let us be proud about these Indians who have lived their lives in South Africa embodying our highest and fundamental ideals.
My dear countrymen, I have received a message from Shilpi Varma, to whom I am grateful. Her concern is very genuine. She has made me aware of an incident: –
“Pradhan Mantri Ji, I am Shilpi Varma speaking from Bengaluru. Some days ago, I read in a news article that a lady became a victim of fraud and cheat email, lost 11 lakh rupees and committed suicide. Being a woman, I feel an empathy with her family. What is your opinion about such cheat and fraud emails.”
She has pointed a certain incident, and you must also be aware that we get messages on our mobile phones and emails, proclaiming attractive offers that you have won a jackpot of so many rupees; if you pay a certain amount then you become eligible for the greater amount. People get duped by this money trap. These are new methods of technology that are spreading in the entire world for cheating people. And just as technology plays an increasingly bigger role in our economic system, it also invites those who misuse it. A retired gentlemen, who not only had to get his daughter married but also to build his home, one day he received an SMS, that there was a gift that had arrived from abroad and could be obtained if he deposited 2 lakh rupees as custom duty in a bank account and this gentlemen without giving any thought took out 2 lakh rupees from his hard earned life savings and sent it to some stranger. That too on the strength of just an SMS! And in very little time, he understood that he had been looted! You too must be getting similarly confused sometimes! These people write a letter in such style that it seems perfect. They use fake letter pads while sending these letters. They obtain your credit card number and debit card number and empty your bank account through technology. And this new means of fraud is digital fraud. I believe that we must be aware against such lure, must remain cautious and if such false communications come to our notice, then we must share them with our friends and make them aware also. Shilpi Varma has brought this important thing to my notice, which although even you must have encountered, but may be you did not take it that seriously, but I feel there is need to look at it seriously.
My dear countrymen these days, the Parliament Session is going on, and during the Parliament Session, I get to meet many people from across our nation. Our MPs also bring people from their constituencies and introduce them to me; they tell me many things, their difficulties also. But recently I had a pleasant experience, real pleasant experience! Student from Aligarh had come to meet me. You should have seen the enthusiasm of those boys and girls. They had brought a big photo album with them and their faces were lit with joy. They showed me the pictures of how they had beautified the Aligarh railway station! These were artistic painting done on the station. What is more, they had searched for and collected the plastic bottles and oil cans lying in the garbage in the villages and by filling those with soil and planting saplings, they have transformed those pots into a vertical garden. And by creating this vertical garden on the site of railway station, they have given it a new look. If you go to Aligarh, do visit the railway station. I am receiving news from many railway stations in the country where the local populace has taken to depicting on the walls of the railway stations, their area’s identity, through means of their arts. They have brought about a refreshing feeling. This is a prime example of the great transformation, which can be brought about through people’s participation. I felicitate all such citizens involved in these kinds of activities and especially congratulate friends from Aligarh.
My dear countrymen, with the onset of rainy season, there is also an onset of festival season in our country. There would be fairs everywhere, festivities would be observed in temples and places of worship. You too will become a participant at home and outside during the festive celebrations. The festival of Raksha Bandhan is a festival of special significance. Just like last year, can’t you gift on the occasion of Raksha Bandhan Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojna or Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojna to mothers and sisters of our country. Think about it, we should gift such a present to our sisters, which really provides her security in future. Not only that, we may be having in our homes a lady making food for us or a lady who cleans our house, a daughter of an impoverished mother! To them also, you can gift Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojna or Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojna on this festival of Raksha Bandhan. And this is what social security in reality is all about; this is the true meaning of Raksha Bandhan.
My dear countrymen there are many among us who were born after independence. And I am the first Prime Minister of this nation who was born in free India. ‘Quit India movement’ started on 8th august, and this year would be the 75th year of ‘Quit Hind -Quit Bharat” and on 15th august, it would be 70th year of our independence. We are enjoying our independence and are proud to be free citizens, but this is an occasion to remember those who sacrificed their all for winning our independence. The 75th year of Quit India and 70th year of Independence can be source of new inspiration, source of new enthusiasm and an occasion to take a pledge to do something for our nation. The whole nation should be imbued with the spirit of those great patriots and we should once again experience anew the fragrance of freedom. Let us all create such an atmosphere. Independence Day should not be a government event, it should be the celebration of the entire people. Just like Diwali, it should be our own festival. I hope that you too become inspired with the spirit of patriotism and do something good in that vein. Do send a picture of it on ‘Narendra Modi app. Let us create such an atmosphere in the nation.
Dear countrymen, I have the good fortune to talk to the nation from ramparts of Red Fort on 15thAugust, it is a tradition. You too must be having certain thoughts that you wish were proclaimed from Red Fort. I invite you to write to me about your thoughts that I, as your representative, as your Pradhan Sevak should talk about from the Red Fort. Send me suggestions, your advice and new thoughts, I will try to convey your thoughts to rest of the countrymen. I do not wish that whatever I speak from the ramparts of Red Fort should just be the opinion of the Prime Minister; it should be the collective voice of 125 crores countrymen. Do send me something, either on ‘Narendra Modi app’ or on MYGOV.IN. Today the platforms of technology are such that your message can reach me very easily. I invite you once again, come, let us remember and salute our great freedom fighters, who sacrificed their lives for India and let us move ahead with the pledge to do something for our nation. My best wishes to you all and many thanks.


23. AUGUST 28, 2016
My dear countrymen, Namaskar,
Tomorrow, 29th August is the birth anniversary of hockey wizard Dhyan Chand. This occasion is celebrated as ‘National Sports Day’ throughout the country. I offer my tributes to Dhyan Chand ji and wish to remind you all about his invaluable contribution. He played a pivotal role in helping India win Hockey Gold Medals in Olympic Games of 1928, 1932 and 1936. All of us cricket lovers know Bradman’s name very well. He had complimented Dhyan Chand ji by saying that ‘he scores goals like runs’. Dhyan Chand ji was a living example of sportsman spirit and nationalism. During a match in Kolkata one player from the opposite team hit him on the head with the hockey stick. At that point, only 10 minutes were left in the game. And, Dhyan Chand ji scored three goals in just those ten minutes and said – “I avenged the hit by scoring goals”.
Dear countrymen, as the time of Mann Ki Baat draws near, a very large number of suggestions are received on MyGov or NarendraModiApp. These are on diverse topics. But, I saw that this time in most of these suggestions, people had asked me to say something about the Rio Olympics. I find it a very positive sign that our common people have such attachment and awareness about Rio Olympics and they are insisting that the Prime Minister of the country says something on this matter. It shows that besides Cricket, our people have so much involvement in and awareness and knowledge about other sports and games also. For me, even reading these messages proved to be a source of inspiration. One Shri Ajit Singh ji has written on NarendraModiApp – “Please, this time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ do talk about the education of our daughters, our ‘Betis’ and their participation in sports because they have brought laurels for the country by winning medals at the Rio Olympics.” One Shri Sachin has written to urge that in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ this time a mention may please be made about Sindhu, Saakshi and Deepa Karmakar. Whatever medals we got have been earned by our daughters. These Betis have once again proved that they are second to none in any respect. One of these daughters is from North India while there is one who belongs to South India and then there is one from the Eastern part. All in all, they represent all corners of our country. It seems that our daughters in the whole of India have decided to take up the responsibility of bringing glory to the nation.
Shikhar Thakur has written on MyGov that we could have performed better at the Olympics. He has written – “Respected Modi Sir, first of all, congratulations on our winning two medals at Rio. However, I want to draw your attention to the question – was our performance really good? And, the answer is ‘No’. We have to go a long way in the field of sports. Our parents, even today, insist on focusing on studies and academics. Sports are considered a waste of time in our society. We need to change this mindset. Society needs motivation for this. And, no one can do this better than you.”
Similarly, one Shri Satya Prakash Mehra ji has written on NarednraModiApp – “In Mann Ki Baat, there is a need to focus on extra-curricular activities, especially on encouraging children and youth to play.” Thousands of people have expressed similar sentiments. There is no denying the fact that we could not perform up to the expectations. Some of our players could not even touch during these Games their own performance level which they had achieved during the domestic events in India. In the medals chart, our tally was only two medals. However, it is also a fact that if we look closely, we shall find that despite missing medals, Indian players gave a very good account of themselves for the first time in some of the events.
See, our Abhinav Bindra very narrowly missed the medal and got fourth place in Shooting. Dipa Karmakar produced a superb performance in Gymnastics, although she remained at the fourth place and missed a Bronze by a very narrow margin. But, how can we forget that she is India’s first daughter to qualify in Gymnastics for the Olympics and also to reach the final round. The pair of Sania Mirza and Rohan Bopanna met almost a similar fate in Tennis. Our athletes this time gave a creditable performance. After 32 years of P.T. Usha’s feat, Lalita babar qualified for the finals in track and field. Our Women’s Hockey Team qualified for the Olympic Games after a space of 36 long years. Men’s Hockey Team reached knock out stage after 36 years. Our team is quite strong. And the interesting part is that Gold Medalist Argentina lost just one match in the entire tournament and the team which defeated them was INDIA. Thus, the future surely seems bright for us.
Vikas Krishna Yadav reached the quarter finals in Boxing but could not win Bronze. Many players like Aditi Ashok, Dattu Bhokanal, Atanu Das gave a very good performance. But my dear countrymen, we do have to go a long way. And if we stick to the same routine, we may perhaps keep facing the same disappointment. I have announced setting up of a committee. The Government of India will make an in depth in-house analysis and will study the practices being followed around the world. We shall prepare a roadmap on how we can do better. We have to prepare a far reaching plan keeping in view the Olympics in 2020, 2024, 2028. I urge the State Governments also to set up similar committees to find out as to what we can do in sports. What can each state do? The states can take up one or two sports of their choice and display their strength.
I urge our sports associations also to do objective and impartial brainstorming on this. And, I also request all citizens of the country who have interest in this matter to mail their suggestions on NarendraModiApp. They may write to the government; associations may discuss these issues and submit their memoranda to the government. State governments too should deliberate on this matter and provide their suggestions. But, we must prepare ourselves fully and thoroughly. And, I am confident that we, the nation of 125 crore people comprising 65 percent youth population can reach an exalted status in the world of sports too. We have to move ahead with this resolve.
My dear countrymen, 5th September is ‘Teachers Day’. For many years, I have been spending a lot of time with students on Teachers Day and that too as a student myself. I used to learn quite a lot from those young children. For me, 5th September was Teachers Day as well as an Education Day. But, this time I have to leave for G-20 Summit and so felt in my heart that I should express my feelings in this regard in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ today.
In our life, a teacher holds the same place which a mother does. We have also seen such teachers who care more for their pupils than for themselves. They devote their lives for their disciples, their students. These days, after Rio Olympics, Pulela Gopi Chand ji is being talked about everywhere. He is a player first but he has set up a glorious example of what a good coach, that is, a teacher should be. I see Gopi Chand ji today as an excellent teacher besides being a very accomplished player. And, on Teachers Day, I salute Pulela Gopi Chand ji for his hard work, his dedication towards sports and his manner of finding happiness in the success of his disciples. We always feel the contribution of our teachers in our lives. 5th September happens to be the birthday of India’s former President Dr. Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan ji and the country celebrates this as Teachers Day. Whatever post he held in his life, he always tried to live like a teacher, an educator. Not only this, he always said that “a good teacher can only be one who keeps the student within always alive”. Dr. Radhakrishnan ji showed this by living as a teacher and by keeping alive the student within him despite holding the highest office of the President.
Some times when I think of it, I remember so many incidents related with my teachers because they were our heroes in our small village. However, I can happily say that even now I receive a hand written letter every month from one of my teachers, who has turned 90 now. In this letter, he mentions books read by him during that month along with quotations. He also gives his comments on what he deems correct or otherwise in whatever I have done during the month. It is as if he is, even now, teaching me in the class room. In a way, he is conducting a correspondence course for me even today. And, about his handwriting even at the age of 90, I marvel that he writes so beautifully whereas my own handwriting is very poor. That is why, whenever I look at somebody’s good handwriting, I have a great respect for it. You may also be having similar experience. If you tell the world about whatever good has happened in your life because of your teachers, people’s attitude towards teachers would change. It will be a matter of pride and it is our duty to enhance the honour of our teachers in the society. If you have a photograph with your teacher or an incident connected with your teacher or an inspirational thing associated with your teacher, please do share the same on NarendraModiApp. Looking at the contribution of teachers in the country from the point of view of students is also immensely valuable in itself.
My dear countrymen, Ganesh Utsav is drawing near. Ganesh ji removes all obstacles and let us all wish that our country, our society, our families, and each one of us may lead a life free of obstacles. But, when we mention Ganesh Utsav, it is natural to remember Lokmanya Tilak ji. The tradition of public celebration of Ganesh Utsav is Lokmanya Tilak’s gift to us. By publicly celebrating Ganesh Utsav, he turned this religious occasion into a festival of national awakening and social refinement. These Ganesh festivities included holding wide-ranging discussions on the issues that touched our lives and society, and comprised such programmes which provided a new vigour and vitality to our social fabric. Also, his mantra “Swaraj, that is, freedom is my birthright” should have the main focus thereby strengthening the freedom movement. Now, not in Maharashtra alone but in each corner of India, Ganesh Utsav is celebrated publicly. Young people make elaborate preparations, they are full of vigour. Some people even now try to follow the path shown by Lokmanya Tilak ji. They organise debates on topics of public interest, and hold essay competitions and rangoli competitions. Tableus depict the issues of social concern in a very artistic manner. In a way, a mass campaign of public education gets underway through these Ganesh festivities. Lokmanya Tilak ji gave us the inspirational mantra – “Swaraj, that is, freedom is our birthright.” But now we live in independent India. So do we through these public Ganesh festivals move now to SURAAJ, that is, good governance by proclaiming ‘SURAAJ is my birthright’. Good governance, SURAAJ, should be our priority; can we not recite this mantra and give a message for it in the public Ganesh festival celebrations? Come on, I invite you all.
It is true that festivals express the vitality of a society. Festivals infuse new life into individuals as well as the society. Life seems to be impossible without festivals but these have to be moulded according to the needs of the changing times. I have seen that this time, many people have written to me mentioning Ganeshotsav and Durga Puja. They are worried about environment. One Shri Shankar Narayan Prashant has strongly urged –“Modi ji, kindly tell the people through your Mann Ki Baat that they should not use Ganesh idols made of Plaster of Paris. Why should we not use Ganeshji idols made of the clay from the village pond. POP idols are not environment friendly”. He has expressed a great pain, others have also. I request you all as to why should we not use clay in making Ganesh and Durga idols and revert to our old tradition. This will help in environment preservation, prevent pollution of our rivers and ponds and also provide protection to small creatures living in water. This is also the service of God. Ganesh ji removes obstacles. So, we should not make such Ganeshji idols, which create problems. I do not know how you will take my suggestions but it is not just me but many other people saying the same thing. I have heard about many such people including Pune based sculptor Shri Abhijit Dhondphale, Kolhapur institutions Nisarg-Mitra and Vigyan Prabodhini, Nisarg Katta in Vidarbh, Gyan Prabodhini of Pune, and Girgaoncha Raja of Mumbai. Many such institutions work hard to promote Ganesh idols made from clay and they also propagate it. Eco-friendly Ganeshotsav is also social service. There is still time left before the start of Durga Pooja festivities. If we resolve now, our efforts will lead to employment generation for those families which traditionally used to make clay idols in the past. Also the clay will go back and get dissolved in the pond or the river and will thus help in protecting the environment. I offer my best wishes to you all for Ganesh Chaturthi.
My dear countrymen, Bharat Ratna Mother Teresa will be canonized, that is, accorded sainthood on 4th September. Mother Teresa devoted her entire life to the service of the poor in India. Though she was born in Albania and her mother tongue was not English, yet she transformed her life and did everything to be able to serve the poor. When Mother Teresa, who served the poor in India all through her life, is accorded Sainthood, it is quite natural for we Indians to feel proud. Indian government will send an official delegation under the leadership of our External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj to represent 125 crore Indians at the canonization ceremony to be held on 4th September. We keep learning something or the other from great men and women, saints, sages, holy people. We shall continue to receive something, learn something from them and keep on doing some good things.
My dear countrymen, when development becomes a mass movement, a big transformation takes place. Peoples’ power is, in a way, considered to be a divine incarnation. Government of India has made a successful effort to clean the Ganga and involve the people for this project with the cooperation of five State governments. Pradhans of villages situated on the banks of the river Ganga were invited to Allahabad on the 20th of this month. They included men as well as women. They came to Allahabad and took an oath before Mother Ganga that they will make all out efforts to immediately stop the practice of open defecation in their villages situated on the banks of Ganga, start a campaign of building toilets and also that these villages will make their full contribution in cleaning up Ganga and will ensure that Ganga is not polluted now. I congratulate all the Pradhans who had assembled in Allahabad with this resolve from different States; they had come from Uttrakhand, from Uttar Pradesh, from Bihar, from Jharkhand and from West Bengal. I also congratulate all those Ministries of the Government of India and also those ministers who turned this vision into reality. I also want to thank the Chief Ministers of these five States for taking the vital step in the direction of making Ganga clean by involving people’s power.
My dear countrymen, certain things touch me very deeply and my heart bows in respect to those who visualize such heartwarming initiatives. In Kabirdham district of Chhatisgarh more than 1.25 lakh students from about 1700 schools collectively wrote letters to their parents. Some students wrote in English, some wrote in Hindi and some in Chhatisgarhi to their parents telling them that there should be toilets in their houses. They demanded building toilets. Some students even wrote that they would rather go without celebrating birthday but the toilet must be constructed.
Students of age between seven to seventeen took up this task. And this had such an impact, such an emotional impact that while the students were going to school the next day, their parents handed over reply letters to them addressed to the teacher in which they promised to build toilets by a certain date positively. My compliments to those who visualized this idea, compliments to these students and special compliments to those parents who took their childrens’ letters so seriously and also took a decision to construct a toilet. This is what inspires us.
In Koppal district of Karnataka, a sixteen year old girl Mallamma started a Satyagrah against her own family. She launched the Satyagrah and stopped eating and she did that not to ask something for herself, not to demand good clothes or have sweets. This daughter Mallamma was adamant to have a toilet built in her house. But, the family was not in a good position economically. The daughter stuck to her demand and was not prepared to end her Satyagrah. The village pradhan Mohammad Shafi came to know about this. He was told that Mallamma had protested to press for her demand for getting a toilet built in her house. Now, look at the gesture of village Pradhan Mohammad Shafi, he arranged eighteen thousand rupees and got a toilet built within a week. Just see the power and strength in Mallamma’s protest, and also consider the grand gesture of a village Pradhan like Mohammad Shafi. Look how the solutions to problems are found, this is the power of the people.
My dear countrymen, Swachha Bharat has become the dream of each Indian. Some Indians have made it their resolve. Some Indians have made it their aim and purpose. But, each one is connected to it in one or the other way and everyone is making a contribution. Daily we hear about the various innovative efforts in this direction. Acting on one such idea, the Government of India has called upon the people to make short films of 2 to 3 minutes duration on Swachhta, that is, cleanliness and send these to the Government. You can find details of this plan on website. A competition will be held and the winners will be awarded prizes on Gandhi Jayanti Day on 2nd October. I request TV channels also to invite such films and hold a competition. Creativity can give a new strength to Swachhata Abhiyan or cleanliness campaign. New slogans will emerge, newer methods will come to knowledge, a new inspiration will be generated and all this will happen with the great support of the people. Lesser known artists could be taken and it is not necessary to have a big studio and a big camera. You can even shoot a film these days using your mobile phone camera. I call upon you all to come forward and participate.
My dear countrymen, India has always tried its best to have close, cordial and vibrant relations with its neighbours. A very important event took place recently. The Honourable President of India Shri Pranab Mukherjee inaugurated a new radio channel named ‘Akashvani Maitree Channel’ at Kolkata. Now, some people may wonder whether Honourable President should inaugurate a Radio Channel? But this is no ordinary Radio Channel, it is a very big and very important step. We have Bangladesh as our neighbour. We know that both Bangladesh and West Bengal continue to have a common cultural heritage. So, Akashvani Maitree on this side and Bangladesh Betaar on that side will mutually share the content and Bengali speaking people on both sides will enjoy the programmes of Akashvani, that is, All India Radio. This people to people contact is a big contribution of Akashvani. The President launched this radio channel. I extend my thanks to Bangladesh also for collaborating with us in this initiative. I congratulate the friends in All India Radio too for making their contribution in our foreign policy also.
My dear countrymen, although you have entrusted me with the responsibilities of Prime Minister but I also am a human being just like you. At times, sensitive events touch me a little too deeply. Such sentimental incidents generate new energy, give new inspiration and this is what motivates us Indians to do some remarkable things. I received a letter recently which touched my heart. A motherly lady of about 84 years of age who is a retired teacher wrote that letter to me. If she had not forbidden me from revealing her name, I from the core of my heart wanted to announce her name while talking to you. She wrote in her letter that after my appeal to the people to forego their cooking gas subsidy, she had given up her subsidy and then she even forgot about it. However, a few days ago a person on my behalf went to her and delivered a letter in which she was thanked for her giving up the subsidy. And, she has said that a letter from the Prime Minister was no less than a Padma Shree honour for her.
Dear countrymen, you may be knowing that I have tried to send a letter, to be delivered personally through my representatives, to all those who surrendered their cooking gas subsidy on my appeal. My effort is to send letters to more than one crore people. Under this plan my letter had reached this mother who wrote back to me saying that I was doing a good work under the campaign of providing relief to those poor ladies who are getting freedom from the smoke of a Chulha. I am a retired teacher and will cross the age of 90 years within a few years and I am sending you a donation of fifty thousand rupees which you can use in this mission of providing relief from the Chulha smoke to the poor women. You may well imagine the missionary spirit of this retired teacher living on pension and donating an amount of fifty thousand rupees for the sake of provision of gas connection to the other poor mothers and sisters, in order to save them from the ill effects of Chulha smoke. It is not a question of 50 thousand rupees but the basic question is of the empathy in this old lady and it is because of the blessings of this lady and of crores of our other mothers and sisters which strengthens my confidence in the future of the country. And, she did not write to me this letter as a Prime Minister but she straightforwardly wrote – “Modi Bhaiya!” I salute this wonderful mother and I also salute crores of similar mothers in India who keep doing something or the other all the time for the benefit of others despite facing many difficulties themselves.
My dear countrymen, we were struggling with drought-like conditions last year but this August we have been facing the fury of floods all through. In some parts of the country, there have been repetitive floods. State governments, Union government, local self-government bodies, social organisations and the citizens did whatever best could be done. Yet, even amidst the reports of these floods, some such events happened which should be remembered. Which show the power of unity, and how big results can be achieved by working together? The month of August this year has become memorable. In August 2016, about 90 political parties in the country, many of these parties in the Parliament, which were staunch opponents of each other and which do not miss the slightest opportunity against each other, all these parties got united and passed the GST Act. The credit for this goes to all the parties. And, this is an example which shows that great tasks can be accomplished by working in unison to move ahead. Similarly, about the incidents that took place in Kashmir and all that happened in Kashmir, all political parties in the country collectively expressed their views in one voice. A massage was sent to the whole world, a massage also went to the separatist forces and our sympathy was expressed towards the people of Kashmir. Whatever interaction with whomsoever I had on Kashmir resounded with these views quite prominently and if I may try to summarise these views and comments, the gist and essence were unity and affection; these two were the fundamental points. And, we all are of the view, and this is the view of all 125 crore Indians, right from the village Pradhan to the Prime Minister that every loss of life in Kashmir – whether it is of a young man or of a security personnel – it is our own loss, a loss of our people, a loss for the nation! Those trying to disturb peace in Kashmir by putting small children in the front and hiding behind them will have to be answerable to these very innocent children some day.
My dear countrymen, ours is a vast nation, full of diversities. To keep this country of manifold diversities united, we all as citizens, as society and as the government, have a responsibility to encourage things which strengthen our national unity and highlight these with full vigour, only then we can make our country’s future bright, and, of course, this will be achieved. I have full faith in the power of my 125 crore countrymen. That is all for today, many many thanks.


24. SEPTEMBER 25, 2016
My dear countrymen, Namaskar! We recently lost 18 brave sons of our country in a terrorist attack in Uri Sector in Jammu and Kashmir. I salute these valiant soldiers and pay my tributes to them. This cowardly act has shocked the entire Nation. There are strong emotions of widespread grief as well as anger across the country. And, this is not only a loss for the families who have lost a son, a brother or a husband. In fact, it is a national loss. And, therefore, I will just reiterate to you, my countrymen, what I had said that very day, that the guilty will certainly be punished.
My dear countrymen, we have full faith in our armed forces. They will foil with their valour every such conspiracy, and they are the ones to reach the pinnacle of bravery so that we, their 1.25 billion fellow countrymen, can live peacefully and be happy. We are proud of our army. We politicians have many opportunities to speak our mind and we do speak. But, the forces do not speak, they take action.
I also wish today to specially talk to those living in Kashmir. Kashmiris are now beginning to recognize well the true face of the anti-national forces. And as they understand the truth better, they are now separating themselves from such elements and have started moving on the path of peace. Every parent wants the schools and colleges to be functioning properly at the earliest. Farmers also feel that their ripened crops and fruits should reach markets across the country. Economic activities too should be back on track. And during the last few days there has been a movement towards restoration of trading activities. We all know that peace, unity and harmony are the only way to solve our problems and also the way to our progress and development. We have to scale greater heights of development for the sake of our future generations. I am very sure that by sitting together we shall definitely find solutions to our problems, find ways to move ahead and also pave a better path for future generations in Kashmir. Providing security to people in Kashmir is the responsibility of the administration. The government has to take some steps to maintain law and order. I shall also tell the security forces that all our capabilities, power, laws, rules and regulations are basically meant to maintain law and order in order to provide a life of peace and happiness for the common people of Kashmir. We shall strictly abide by this. At times, people thinking differently from us also provide new ideas. These days I get to learn quite a lot through social media. I get an opportunity to know and understand views of different people from all corners of the country and this actually adds to the strength of our democracy. Recently, Harshvardhan, a young student of Eleventh Class has put before me a different type of thought. He has written – “I was very much distressed after the Uri attack and strongly felt like doing something. But, I did not know how to go about it as what could a young student like me possibly do. So, I was trying to find some way to be of some service to the nation. And I have resolved that I would devote three more hours daily towards my studies. I shall become a capable citizen so that I can serve the country well.
Brother Harshvardhan, I am happy to know that despite this atmosphere charged with anger, you are able to think in a healthy manner at such a young age. But, dear Harshvardhan, I shall also like to add that the anger in the hearts of our countrymen is of a very high value. It symbolises our national consciousness. This anger has the resolve to do something. Yes! You have presented that with a constructive approach. But, you must be aware that during the 1965-war, Lal bahadur Shastri Ji was leading us and then also similar feelings of rage, anger and patriotic fervour were sweeping the nation. Everyone wanted that something must happen, must be done. Then, Lal Bahadur Shashtri Ji had very aptly tried to touch the emotional universe of the country. He gave the mantra-“Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan” which inspired the common people of the country to work for the nation. Lal Bahadur Shashtri Ji showed that even amidst the deafening sounds of gunfire and bombardment, there existed an alternative way for every citizen for expressing patriotism. During the freedom movement, Mahatma Gandhi also used to mount highly successful experiments to divert the strong energy of that movement towards constructive social work, whenever a lull was needed amidst the extreme intensity in that movement. Now, if all of us, that is, our armed forces, people in the government, fulfill our respective responsibilities sincerely, and all of us countrymen, each citizen make some constructive contribution imbued with the feeling of patriotism, our country will most definitely scale greater heights.
My dear countrymen, Shri T.S. Kartik has written on NarendraModiApp that our athletes who participated in the Paralympics have created a new history and their performance is a triumph of the human spirit. Shri Varun Vishwanathan has also written on NarendraModiApp that our athletes did a commendable job and that I should talk about this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Not only the two of you but each one of our countrymen has felt an emotional attachment with our athletes who participated at the Paralympics. Perhaps going beyond sporting achievements, these Paralympics and the performance by our athletes have transformed our attitude towards humanity, towards specially-abled, DIVYANG people. And, I shall never be able to forget what our victorious sister Deepa Malik had to say. When the medal was awarded to her, she said – “Through this medal I have actually defeated the disability itself.” There is great strength in this remark. This time 19 athletes, including three women, took part in Paralympics from our country. Compared to normal sporting activities, when the DIVYANG play, in addition to physical ability and sporting skills, what are needed even more are will power and resolve.
You will be pleasantly surprised to learn that our sportspersons put up their best ever performance this time and won 4 medals including two gold, one silver and one bronze. Brother Devendra Jhajharia won the gold medal in Javelin throw and repeated his gold winning performance after 12 years. One gets older over a period of 12 years and after having won the gold medal once, the passion for the same is also somewhat reduced. Yet, Devendra displayed that physical condition and increasing age could not dent his strong determination and he successfully claimed his second gold medal after a gap of 12 years. And, he was not born a DIVYANG. He lost one of his hands due to suffering electric current shock. Just think about the perseverance and the huge effort put in by him in repeating the feat of winning a second gold medal at 35 years of age 12 years after winning the first one at 23. Mariyappan Thangavelu won a gold medal in High Jump. Thangavelu had lost his right leg when he was just 5. Even poverty could not come in the way of his resolve. He is not from a big city, he does not come from a middle class or rich family. Yet despite facing all sorts of difficulties and physical challenges, at the age of 21, through his unwavering determination he won the medal for the country. As far as Athlete Deepa Malik is concerned, she has won laurels many a times by emerging victorious repeatedly.
Varun C. Bhati won a bronze medal in High Jump. Medals in Paralympics have a significance of their own, but going beyond that these medals have made a very big contribution in transforming the attitude towards our DIVYANG brothers and sisters in our country, our society and our neighborhoods. These have not only inspired our empathy but also changed the way of looking at the DIVYANG people. Only very few people might be knowing as to what stupendous feats were performed by these DIVYANG people in the Paralympics this time. Olympic Games were held at the same venue only a few days ago. Can anyone ever imagine the DIVYANG athletes breaking a record set during the general Olympic Games? It happened this time. In the 1500 meter race, Abdellatif Baka of Algeria set a new record by completing the 1500 meters race taking 1.7 seconds less than the time taken by the gold medalist in the same event at the general Olympics. Not only this, what really surprised me was the fact that the athlete, who finished fourth in this event amongst DIVYANG persons and thus missed winning any medal, actually took less time than the gold medalist of general category in completing the race. I once again congratulate all our Paralympic athletes and India is progressing in the direction of preparing an effective plan for developing our athletes and also the facilities for the Paralympics.
My dear countrymen, last week I had many wonderful experiences in Navsari, Gujarat. It was a very emotional moment for me. Government of India had organized a Mega Camp for DIVYANG persons and a number of world records were established that day. A visually challenged little girl child Gauri Shardul, hailing from far flung forest area in the Dang District, can recite the complete Ramayana epic as she has learnt it by heart. She rendered certain portions before me and when I presented her performance before other persons there, everyone was amazed. I got an opportunity to publicly release a book that day wherein success stories from the lives of some DIVYANG persons had been compiled. These were very inspiring incidents. Government of India created a world record in Navsari which I believe to be very important. The task of fitting hearing aids to 600 hearing impaired DIVYANG people in just eight hours was completed successfully. This deed found a mention in Guinness Book of World Records. Three world records in a single day by DIVYANG people is a matter of great pride for our countrymen.
My dear countrymen, we had launched ‘Swachha Bharat Mission’ two years ago on 2nd October, the birth anniversary of our revered Bapu. That day too I had said that cleanliness should become our nature, a duty for every citizen and there should be an atmosphere harbouring a sense of revulsion against filth. Now it is going to be nearly two years on 2nd October and I can confidently say that one hundred and twenty five crore people of the country have now become more aware about cleanliness. I had said ‘one step towards cleanliness’ and today we can say that each one of us has definitely tried to take one step further. This means that the country has taken 125 crore steps in the direction of achieving cleanliness. This affirms that the direction we have taken is correct and also fruits of the action are very sweet. It has also been seen as to how much can be achieved through making small efforts. Everyone, be it a common citizen, an administrator, in Government offices or roads, bus stops or railways, schools or colleges, religious places, hospitals, from children to old persons, rural poor, farming women- everyone is contributing something in achieving cleanliness. Friends in the media have also played a constructive role. I also know that we still have to go much farther. Yet, the beginning has been good so far. Whole-hearted efforts have been made and a conviction has now set in that we shall indeed succeed. This conviction is important. If we talk of rural India, so far 2 crore 48 lakh or say about two and a half crore toilets have been constructed and we intend to build another one and a half crore toilets in the coming one year. From the point of view of sanitation and keeping in mind the dignity of our citizens, especially the dignity of our mothers and sisters, it is necessary to put an end to the habit of defecating in the open. And, with this in view ‘Open Defecation Free’ or ODF Campaign has been launched. A healthy competition towards achieving liberation from the habit of defecating in open has started at the levels of states, districts and the villages. Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Kerala will achieve very soon cent percent ODF targets. I visited Gujarat recently and the officers there informed me that Porbandar, the birth place of Mahatma Gandhi, will achieve the target of total ODF on 2nd October, 2016. My congratulations to those who have made it possible, and best wishes to those who are trying to reach the target. I appeal to all of my countrymen that to maintain the dignity of our mothers and sisters and for the sake of health of our children, our country needs to get rid of this scourge. Let us forge ahead with a strong resolution. I specially want to suggest a scheme to my young friends who are currently technology savvy. Every citizen has a right to know about the status of the cleanliness mission in his city and the Government of India has provided a dedicated telephone number – 1969 for this purpose. We know that Mahatma Gandhi was born in 1869. In 1969, we celebrated his birth centenary and in 2019 we are going to celebrate the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi. By dialing this number 1-9-6-9 you will be able to know the progress of construction of toilets in your city and will also be able to submit an application for construction of a toilet. You must avail this facility. Not only this, a cleanliness, that is Swachchhata App has been launched for people to lodge complaints concerning cleanliness and also to know about the progress in resolving these complaints. Please make full use of this facility; especially the younger generation must utilize it optimally. Government of India has also appealed to the corporate world to come forward in this endeavour. They can sponsor young professionals willing to work for Swachchhata Mission. They can also be sent to various districts as Swachchha Bharat Fellows.
It will not be sufficient to keep this Cleanliness Campaign confined to beliefs and habits. Imbibing cleanliness as a nature is not enough. In this age, just as cleanliness is related to health, connecting cleanliness to a revenue model is also equally necessary. Waste to wealth should also be one of its components. It is, therefore, imperative that we need to move towards ‘Waste to Compost’ along with the Cleanliness Mission. Solid waste should be processed and be converted into Compost and the government has initiated a policy intervention in this regard. Fertilizer companies have been asked to buy the Compost made out of waste. They should supply this to the farmers who are willing to adopt organic farming. This should also be supplied to those farmers who care about the health of their soil and are willing to improve its quality and also to those farmers whose soil quality has deteriorated because of over use of chemical fertilizers. And for this, Shrimaan Amitabh Bachchan Ji is making a significant contribution as a brand ambassador. I invite youngsters to set up new ‘start ups’ also in this ‘Waste to Wealth’ movement to develop the means and processes, to develop the suitable technology and accomplish mass production at an affordable cost. This is a task worth doing. There is also a big scope of employment generation and an opportunity for tremendous economic activity and wealth creation from waste is achievable. This year a special programme ‘INDOSAN’ – India Sanitation Conference is being organized from 25th September to 2nd October. Ministers, Chief Ministers as also Mayors and Commissioners of metropolitan cities will participate in brainstorming sessions on the sole issue of cleanliness. What can be achieved with technology? What can be the financial model? How to mobilize public participation? How can employment opportunities be increased in this sphere? All these topics will be discussed. And I see clearly that the news about cleanliness keeps pouring in. I recently read in a newspaper that students of Gujarat Technological University launched a Jagran Abhiyan (Awereness Campaign) to build toilets in 107 villages. They themselves put in physical labour and contributed significantly in constructing around 9000 toilets. It might have come to your notice some time ago that under the leadership of Wing Commander Param Veer Singh, a team covered a distance of 2800 kilometres by swimming in Ganga from Dev Prayag to Ganga Sagar to spread the message of cleanliness. Government of India has also chalked out an annual calendar for its departments. Each department is to focus exclusively on cleanliness for a period of 15 days. In the coming October month, from 1st October to 15th October, Drinking Water and Sanitation Department, Panchayati Raj Department and Rural Development Department – these three are going to work under a designated roadmap in their respective areas. Then during last two weeks of October from 16th October to 31st October, three more departments, namely – Agriculture and Farmer Welfare, Food Processing Industries and Consumer Affairs are going to take up cleanliness campaigns in the concerned areas. I request the citizens also to get involved, wherever they feel that they too can pitch in these programmes. You might have seen that a cleanliness survey campaign is also carried out these days. Earlier, the cleanliness status was presented before the countrymen after conducting a survey of 73 cities. Now, this survey will be conducted in about 500 cities with a population of more than 1 lakh. Each city will imbibe a sense of confidence that, well, we have lagged behind but we will surely perform better next time. In this manner an atmosphere of competition for cleanliness has been created. I expect that all of us citizens should contribute as much as we can in the cleanliness mission. 2nd October is the birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi and Lal Bahadur Shastri Ji. Swachchh Bharat Mission is completing two years on this day. I keep on urging everyone to buy some khadi items between Gandhi Jayanti to Diwali. This year also I request that each family should buy one or the other khadi item so that the poor may also be able to light an earthen lamp and celebrate Diwali. This year 2nd October is a Sunday so can we involve ourselves in the cleanliness mission in some way? You involve yourself physically for 2 hours, 4 hours with cleaning work and I request you to share your cleanliness drive photo on NarendraModiApp. If it is a video, then share the video. You will see that with our joint efforts, this movement will get a fresh boost, a new dynamism. Let us all remember Mahatma Gandhi and Lal Bahadur Shastri and take a pledge to do something for the country.
My dear countrymen, one gets a special pleasure in giving, one may not realize it, but the pleasure of giving is divine. I witnessed it some time back when I asked the countrymen to give up their cooking gas subsidy and they responded whole-heartedly. This in itself was a very inspirational event in India’s national life. Now, many youngsters, small groups, people from the corporate world, schools and some NGOs are jointly going to organize ‘Joy of Giving Week’ from 2nd October to 8th October. Under this campaign, food items and clothes will be collected and supplied to the needy persons. When I was in Gujarat, all our workers used to walk the streets seeking donations of old toys from families and then presented these toys to Anganwadis in poor neighbourhoods. These toys provided great pleasure to the poor children, which was a great sight to behold. I feel that we should encourage and help these young people who are organising ‘Joy of Giving Week’ in many cities. This is a kind of a ‘Donation Festival’, a Daan Utsav. I convey my best wishes to all those young persons who are undertaking this mission.
My dear countrymen, today is 25th September, the birth anniversary of Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay Ji and his birth centenary year commences from today. Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay undertook the tremendous task of defining and elaborating upon the political ideology being followed by lakhs and lakhs of workers like me. He was a supporter of a political ideology connected with the roots of India, he presented his own soul stirring political philosophy, the EKAATM-MAANAV DARSHAN alongside the ideology to uphold India’s great cultural heritage. The centenary year of Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay is commencing from today. ‘Sarvajan Hitay – Sarvajan Sukhay’, the principle of ANTYODAY – these are his gifts to us. Mahatma Gandhi also talked about the last man standing in the queue. How can the poorest of the poor avail of benefits of development? ‘Work for every hand, water to every field’ – through only these two words he presented his entire economic agenda. The country should celebrate his centenary year as GARIB KALYAN VARSH, ‘Year for Welfare of the Poor’. We can alleviate poverty when everyone including society and governments focuses attention on measures to provide benefits of development to the poor. The place where I live was known as Race Course Road since British rule but now in the centenary year of Pandit Deen Dayal Updhyay this has been named ‘Lok Kalyan Marg’. This is a symbolic representation of the ‘Year for the Welfare of the Poor’, the centenary year of Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhyay. I respectfully pay my homage to revered Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay, who has been a source of inspiration to all of us, and an embodiment of our intellectual heritage.
My dear countrymen, I had started ‘Mann Ki Baat’ on Vijayadashmi two years ago. My sincere effort was that ‘Mann Ki Baat’ should not become a programme of praising and highlighting only government’s achievements; Mann Ki Baat should not become a programme of political oneupmanship, allegations and counter allegations. and sometimes passionate advocacy. Despite numerous pressures during these past two years – sometimes being tempted due the surrounding atmosphere, at times with provocations to say something with indignation – overcoming all such impulses over these two years with your blessings, I have moved through these obstacles and earnestly tried to connect with the common man through Mann Ki Baat. How the common man of this country keeps on inspring me all the time? What are the hopes and aspirations of the common man in the country? And this common man, who occupies my mind all the time, always gets projected in Mann Ki Baat. For our countrymen, Mann Ki Baat may be a source of information. For me, Mann Ki Baat has been the means to feel the strength of my 1.25 billion countrymen, to recall their great capabilities and power and to draw inspiration from the same for my own endeavours and initiatives. On completion of two years of Mann Ki Baat this week, I wish to express my sincere gratitude from the core of my heart to all you listeners who appreciated it, who contributed to improving it and thus blessed me. I am grateful to All India Radio also which not only broadcast my views but also put in their best efforts to transmit it in all languages. I am also thankful to those countrymen who knocked on the doors of the government by writing letters and by sending in suggestions and highlighting shortcomings of the government and All India Radio mounted special programmes on these letters by inviting concerned government functionaries and thus provided a platform to address the problems. Thus, Mann Ki Baat became a new opportunity of social transformation rather than just remaining a mere talk show of 15-20 minutes. What can be more satisfying than this for any one? And therefore, I thank everyone and express my gratitude to all who contributed in making it a successful programme.
My dear countrymen, from next week festive season will be ushered in with Navratri and Durga Puja, Vijayadashmi, preparations for Deepavali and all such activities. This is an occasion for praying to SHAKTI, Unity in society is the power or SHAKTI of the country. Be it Navratri or Durga Puja – how can this SHAKTI-UPASANA become the festival of celebrating social unity? How to make it a festival of social bonding? And that would be the true prayer to Shakti, only then can we celebrate together the festival of victory. Let us bow before Shakti, nurture it, march forward with the mantra of unity. Come, let us celebrate Navratri and Durga Puja festivals with peace, unity and harmony to enable our nation to scale newer heights. Let us celebrate victory on Vijayadashmi.
Thank you very much.




25. OCTOBER 30, 2016
My dear countrymen, my heartiest and best Deepawali wishes to all of you. Deepawali is celebrated with great fervor and enthusiasm throughout our country. In India almost on all 365 days of the year, one festival or the other is celebrated in some part of the country. Somebody watching from a distance would genuinely feel that festivity is a synonym for the Indian way of life, and this is natural too. Right from the vedic period to the present day, there has been a tradition of festivities in India which, of course, has matched the occasions at different periods of time. We have also witnessed the courage to do away with outdated traditions. And, the transformations in the manner of celebrating these festivals according to changing times and changing social mores have been accepted and adopted very naturally.
However, we can very well discern one characteristic that this entire journey of Indian festivals, its widespread effect, its depth, its reach to each individual are all interlinked with one spirit which exhorts evolution from the ‘self’ to the ‘whole’, the ‘collective existence’. The idea is that there should be a development of individuals and their personalities, the limited scope of thinking must expand and cover not only the whole society but, in fact, the whole universe. And this is achieved through these festivals. Indian festivals at times appear like community feasts but in that also the consciousness has been to there as to what should be or should not be eaten during that particular season. What crop has been harvested by the farmers and how that yield is to be made a part of the festivities, what food habits will be appropriate in a particular season from the health point of view.
Our ancestors had very scientifically encompassed all these aspects in our festivals. Today, the whole world is talking about the environment. Destruction of nature is a matter of great concern. India’s tradition of celebrating festivals has been one to strengthen our love for nature and to develop each individual, right from childhood, as a cultured person. Festivals have evoked a sense of responsibility towards everything, be it trees, plants, rivers, animals, mountains, birds, etc. Nowadays we observe Sunday as a holiday but in our older generations, labourers, fishermen and others from such sections of society used to observe holidays on New Moon, that is Amavasya and Full Moon, that is Poornima. And science has proved that on these days changes take place impacting the sea-water; other factors affect nature and these also influence the human mind. Thus we had developed the tradition to observe our holidays also intertwined with the phenomena of the Universe keeping the scientific aspects in focus.
Now when we celebrate Diwali, as I said, each of our festivals carries a message and teaches us something. The festival of lights Deepawali conveys the message of ‘TAMSO MA JYOTIRGAMAYA’, to move from darkness to light. And, this darkness here does not merely signify the absence of light; it is also the darkness of superstition and blind-faith, darkness of ignorance, darkness of poverty and also darkness of social evils. By lighting lamps on Diwali, we try to overcome the darkness of these social shortcomings and individual blemishes – attaining freedom from this darkness is the real essence of the festival of lights Deepawali, which we celebrate by lighting an earthen lamp, a ‘diya’.
One thing that all of us know very well is that wherever in India we go, whether to the home of the richest of the rich or to the humble dwelling of the poorest of the poor, during the Diwali festival we can see a cleanliness campaign going on in every household. Every nook and corner of the house is cleaned. The less privileged also put in all their efforts to clean their modest earthen utensils because it is Diwali time. Thus, Diwali also encompasses a campaign of cleanliness. But the need of the hour is that not only individual houses but the entire premises, all the neighbourhood, the whole village be cleaned. We have to expand and spread this habit and tradition.
Now, the festival of Deepawali is not confined to the borders of India. In almost all countries of the world, Deepawali is celebrated in one way or the other. Many Governments in the world, their Parliaments and also their ruling classes are joining Deepawali festivities. From countries of the East to those of the West, from developed nations to developing nations and from countries of Africa to Ireland – everywhere we can see the glow and revelry of Deepawali. You may be aware that in America, the US Postal Service has released a special postage stamp on Deepawali this time. The Prime Minister of Canada has shared on Twitter a picture of him lighting a lamp on the occasion of Diwali. British premier Theresa May organised a reception in London involving all communities on Deepawali in which she herself participated. And, there would hardly be a city in UK where Diwali is not celebrated with a great pomp and show. The Prime Minister of Singapore has posted a picture on Instagram and has shared it proudly with the whole world. And, what is that picture about! It shows 16 women MPs of Singapore Parliament standing outside the Parliament all clad in Indian Sarees and this photo has gone viral. All this has been done on the occasion of Deepawali. In Singapore, Diwali celebrations are in full swing in almost all neighbourhoods. The Australian Prime Minister has conveyed his greetings to the Indian community and has called upon all sections of societies to join in the Diwali festivities in various Australian cities. The Prime Minister of New Zealand had recently come to India. He told me that he would have to go back soon as he had to participate in Diwali celebrations there. What I mean to say is that the festival of lights, Deepawali is becoming a festival of inspiration for the world community also to move from darkness to light.
On Deepawali people adorn good clothes, enjoy delicious food items and along with these there is also the bursting of fire-crackers in a big way. The children and the young people very much enjoy this bursting of crackers. But, at times children indulge in reckless bravado and take unnecessary risks. They unwittingly invite a mishap in trying to create a big blast by joining and bursting many crackers together. They are not even mindful of their surroundings, which might have incendiary items leading to fire accidents. News of such mishaps, fire breakouts and even tragic casualties become a cause of big concern on Deepawali. To add to these woes, there is a situation of even the doctors in big numbers being unavailable as they too are away celebrating Deepawali with their families. I specially urge the parents and guardians to be with their children with a watchful eye when they burst firecrackers, so that there is no carelessness or undue audacity and accidents and mishaps are avoided.
In India, the celebration of Diwali lasts for a number of days. It is not restricted to just one day. With a string of festive events such as Govardhan Puja, Bhai Dooj, Laabh Panchmi till Kartik Purnima – this festival of lights goes on for quite a long period of time. Alongside the festivities of Deepawali, we also prepare to celebrate Chhathh Pooja. This Chhathh Pooja is a very important festival in the Eastern parts of our country. It is a big occasion there which lasts for four days. But this also has a unique significance in that it gives a very special message to society. Chhathh Upasana is actually an occasion to pray to the Sun God who gives us so much directly and indirectly that it cannot even be measured by us. And this Chhathh Pooja is for paying obeisance to the almighty Sun. But the adage is that people only pray to the rising sun. However, during the Chhathh Pooja, people worship the setting Sun as well. There is a very profound social message behind this tradition.
When I speak of the Deepawali festival or about the Chhathh Pooja – this is actually an occasion to convey my best wishes to you. But, there is one more thing I have to do. I have to specially thank my countrymen and express my gratitude to them. In the backdrop of the disturbing incidents taking place during the past few months, the soldiers of our defence forces have been sacrificing their all for our peace and happiness. The sacrifice, devotion and zeal of the Jawans of our security forces occupies my mind and heart, my emotional universe all the time. And from that emanated my feeling and resolve that this Diwali must be dedicated to our security forces. I invited my countrymen to join the ‘Sandesh to Soldiers’ campaign. And today, in all humility, I wish to proclaim that there would not be a single soul in India who would not have unbounded love for our Jawans, a sense of deep pride in the members of our security forces. The way these sentiments have been expressed is surely giving strength to each of our countrymen. Your messages to the Jawans of our security forces have proved to be a great morale booster which cannot be easily imagined. Schools, colleges, students, villages, the underprivileged, traders, shopkeepers, political leaders, sportspersons, people from the cine world have all lit a lamp for the country’s Jawans, have joined in this campaign of sending a message of greetings and salutation to our Jawans. The media also made this festival of lights into an opportunity and an occasion to express gratitude towards our armed forces. And why should it not be so? Our Jawans from BSF, CRPF, Indo Tibetan Border Police, Assam Rifles, Navy, Army, Air Force, Coast Guard and many more as I am not able to include all by names are valiantly facing great hardships in the line of duty. While we are celebrating Diwali in the comforts of our homes, some of these Jawans are deployed in the desert areas, others are guarding the towering Himalayan peaks, some are guarding our industrial establishments and some are maintaining security vigil at the airports. What great responsibilities they have on their shoulders! And so if we remember them also while we are in our festive mood, our remembrance gets a new vigour which gets imparted to them also and they feel a new strength. Just one message can enhance their capability and our country has shown it. I earnestly express my gratitude to all our countrymen and women for this gesture. Those who are artistically talented, have expressed themselves through their art. Some persons prepared drawings, made Rangolis, drew cartoons. Those blessed with the blessings of Goddess Saraswati composed poems and couplets. Some came up with inspiring and motivating slogans. It appears that my NarendraModiApp and MyGov have been overwhelmingly filled with emotional messages, in the shape of words, in the form of ‘Pinchhi’, colours, compositions, etc., encompassing innumerable emotions from all; I can imagine how proud our soldiers feel at this moment. Many messages and other expression forms have been received on ‘Sandesh to Soldiers’ hashtag. As a symbol of these, I would like to read a poem which has been sent by Shriman Ashwani Kumar.
Ashwani ji has written: –
I celebrate the festival, feel happy and smile
I celebrate the festival, fee happy and smile
All this is because you are there,
I want to tell you today that you are the guardian of my freedom,
My gift of joy is there just because you are there
I sleep peacefully;
I sleep peacefully, because you are guarding the borders there
The mountains, the skies and the country bow to you
The mountains, the skies and the country bow to you
I too bow in gratitude to you O brave soldier!
I too bow in gratitude to you O brave soldier!
My dear countrymen, sister Shivani, whose parental side of the family as well as her family on the side of her in- laws is full of army soldiers, has sent me a telephone message. Let’s hear what this representative of a military family says:
“Hello Mr. Prime Minister, I am Shivani Mohan calling. The “Sandesh to Soldiers” campaign has been launched on this Deepawali and is proving to be a morale booster for our brothers. I’m from an Army family. My husband is an Army officer. My Father and Father-in-law both served as Army Officers also. So we are full of soldiers on both sides of the family. Our Soldiers and Officers who are guarding our border have been receiving these affectionate messages and all in the Army circle are getting tremendous inspiration and encouragement. I would also like to say that along with Army Officers and soldiers their families and their wives also make sacrifices. Hence the entire army community is receiving a wonderful message and I would also like to wish you a Happy Diwali. Thank you. ”
My fellow citizens, it is true that military personnel guard not only our borders, but they stand as sentinels and fighters on every front of life. Be it a calamitous natural disaster or a law and order crisis or having to deal with enemies or to display courage in motivating misguided youth to return to the mainstream of life, Our Jawans are motivated by a sense of patriotism while rendering service to the nation.
One incident has been brought to my attention and I also want to tell you that how at the core of success small things gather and become a force to reckon with. You must have heard that Himachal Pradesh as a State is now Open Defecation Free, has attained the status of OFD. The first state to achieve this was Sikkim, then Himachal Pradesh accomplished it and Kerala is going to be OFD on November 1st.
But how is this success achieved? Well, I’ll tell you the reason, one of the security personnel of ITBP called Vikas Thakur is from a small village in Sirmour district of Himachal. This village is called ‘Badhana’. Now this ITBP Jawan of ours was in his village on holidays from his duty. In the village at that time there was supposed to be a meeting of the Gram Sabha, so he went to the meeting where a discussion about construction of toilets was in progress. And he found that some of the families were unable to construct toilets due to lack of funds. So, Vikas Thakur of our ITBP, brimming with patriotism felt that no! No! This stigma must be eradicated! See his patriotism for the country; it is not that he serves the nation only by firing bullets on the enemies! Out came his cheque book, and a cheque of Fifty-Seven thousand rupees was handed to the head of the village Panchayat with a request that the 57 households having no toilets be give one thousand rupees each from his side, so that 57 toilets can get constructed and Badhana becomes an Open Defecation Free village! Vikas Thakur demonstrated his heroics by contributing one thousand rupees each from his pocket to the 57 families and thus strengthening the Cleanliness Campaign. And that is how Himachal Pradesh has been empowered to become an Open Defecation Free state.
And similarly in Kerala, I really want to thank young people. It came to my attention, that in the remote forests of Kerala where there is no path to tread upon and only after walking an entire day, some villages can be reached with difficulty; a tribal village panchayat named Idmalakudi is there. It is rarely visited by people. It came to the attention of Engineering students from the nearby urban areas that this village was in dire need of the toilets. NCC cadets, NSS volunteers, Engineering students – all together decided that the toilets will be constructed by them. The building material needed to construct the toilets whether it was bricks or cement, the entire construction material was carried by the young men on their shoulders, spending an entire day walking in those forests. And they themselves worked hard to construct toilets in that village, thus achieving the goal of making a remote village in faraway forests Open Defecation Free! So that is the reason why Kerala is on the verge of being declared free from open defecation. The Municipal Councils and Corporations in Gujarat, numbering over 150 have been declared free from open defecation. 10 districts have also been declared free of open defecation. There is also good news coming from Haryana, Haryana is going to celebrate its Golden jubilee on 1st November and in next few months, Haryana as an entire state will be freed from the stigma of open defecation. As of now, seven districts in Haryana have got rid of open defecation.
Work is progressing at a very rapid pace in all of these states. I have mentioned the work being carried out in some of the places. I convey my heartfelt thanks to all the citizens in these states who have joined in the task of eliminating from our country the darkness resulting from filth.
My fellow citizens, the government plans for the welfare of the people through many of its schemes, and usually when the second scheme follows the first one then the previous scheme is supposed to be discontinued. But generally due attention is not paid to this. The old schemes continue along with the newly implemented schemes and there is also a wait for the next scheme on the anvil. This keeps on happening. Now in our country houses having a gas stove, or those having electricity in the houses do not have a requirement for Kerosene. But who bothers about such things in the government? What happens is that Kerosene is also being provided, so is cooking gas and so is electricity and then middlemen get a chance to usurp their cut from this. I wish to greet the state of Haryana, which has pioneered a method of making Haryana Kerosene free by identifying homes having cooking gas connections or electricity through ‘Aadhar’ numbers. And so far I’ve heard that Haryana has managed to make seven or eight districts absolutely Kerosene free. And with the pace at which this job has been undertaken, I believe that the entire state will soon be completely Kerosene free. Just imagine the change that would be ushered in, theft will stop, the environment would benefit, and we will save our precious foreign exchange and the common folk will get facilities. The only people feeling uncomfortable would be the dishonest persons and the middle-men.
My dear countrymen, Mahatma Gandhi is our guide forever. Even today, his words guide us in setting up the standards and determining the direction that our nation must follow. Gandhiji used to say that when you chalk out a plan, you must first recall the face of the poor and weak and then decide whether the scheme you are going to be implementing will be of any benefit to the poor or not, it should not bring any loss to him! Your decisions should be based on such a benchmark. It is the need of the times that we’ve to address the aspirations that have been arisen in the poor of our nation. We have to help them in getting freed from their troubles in a stepwise manner. Whatever the old dogmatic thinking might have been, but the society now must be freed from discrimination between our sons and daughters. Now our schools are having toilets for girls as well as for boys. For our daughters this is the opportunity to experience an India free from discrimination.
The government undertakes massive immunization programs for our children and yet millions of children are still left out from being immunized and fall prey to diseases. ‘Mission Indradhanush’ is one such operation that involves a vaccination program covering those kids who got left out during previous immunization campaigns and empowers them with immunity against serious diseases. In the twenty-first century, having darkness still prevailing in our villages is something that is not acceptable now. And the rural electrification drive to free the villages of darkness, this major campaign of electrification is proceeding successfully; in fact it is proceeding as per the time-schedule! What will happen to the health of a poor mother how has to inhale smoke equal to that from 400 cigarettes while cooking food on a Chulha which burns wood as fuel. And all this even after so many years of attaining freedom! We are trying to provide a smoke free life to 5 crore such families and we are successfully advancing in that direction.
The small trader, the small businessman, the vegetable vendor, the milk vendor, the one running a hair cutting salon has always been entrapped in the grip of the money lender, repaying interest all his life. The stand up scheme and Jan Dhan account scheme are aimed at freeing these people from the clutches of notorious moneylenders. Crediting money directly into bank accounts via Aadhar aims at directly sending money to the beneficiaries. For the common man this is an opportunity to come out of the grip of middlemen. A campaign has to be started where the target will not only be limited to bring in reforms and transformation but also to obtain freedom from the problem. And this is happening!
My dear countrymen, tomorrow, the 31st October is the birth anniversary of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, the great son of India who vowed to unite India and made this the sole object of his life. On the one hand, 31st October is the birth anniversary of Sardar Saheb, the living legend of national unity and on the other; this is also the death anniversary of Smt. Gandhi. We should and do pay homage to the memories of our great personalities. But a phone call from a gentleman from Punjab and his pain touched me: –
“Pradhan Mantriji namaskar, Sir, I am Jasdeep speaking from Punjab. Sir, as you know, 31st October is Sardar Patel ji’s birthday. Sardar Patel is the great personality who devoted his whole life to unite the country and, I think, he succeeded fully in this mission of his, he brought everybody together. But we may call it the country’s misfortune that on this day itself Indira Gandhi ji was assassinated. And, as we all know, what terrible events took place after her assassination. Sir, I want to know how we can check such unfortunate events and incidents from taking place”.
My dear countrymen, this is not the pain of an individual person. One Sardar, as history goes, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was the second great man after Chanakya who carried on the stupendous job of uniting our country. Bringing independent India under one banner and accomplishing such a herculean task – what a great man he was! We bow a hundred times to that great soul. But the pain remains that Sardar Patel, who lived for India’s unity, strove tirelessly for it, had to even endure some unpleasantness on account of it, but never ever abandoned the path of unity; but on the birth anniversary of this great SARDAR, thousands of Sardars, the family members of thousands of Sardars were killed in the aftermath of the assassination of Smt. Gandhi. These atrocities against Sardars on the birth anniversary of that great personality who lived for unity, that SARDAR, is a page of history, which causes pain to all of us.
But amidst all these turmoils, we have to march forward chanting the Mantra of Unity. Unity in diversity is the strength of our country. Different languages, different castes, different attires, different food habits and despite all these, unity in diversity remains our binding strength. That is India’s great characteristic quality. Each generation has this responsibility, the governments have this responsibility to explore possibilities of integration in each corner of the country and highlight the elements of our integration. We should keep away from the idea of separatism or the attitude of separatism and also guard the country from any such ideology. Sardar Saheb gave us one India, now this is our collective responsibility to develop a Great India, a Shreshtha Bharat. The Mantra of national unity is the very foundation of a strong and great India.
Sardar Saheb’s journey started with a struggle for farmers. He was the son of a farmer. Sardar Saheb had a big role in taking the Freedom movement to the farmers. Making the freedom movement a source of strength in the villages was Sardar Saheb’s big achievement, a result of his organizational capacity and capability. But, Sardar Saheb was not just a man of struggle but also a man who created great things. He believed in the cooperative movement. Today, we often hear the name AMUL. People of India and even those in other countries are familiar with every product of AMUL. But, only a few people would know that it was only through his farsightedness that Sardar Saheb envisioned the creation of a Cooperative Milk Producers Union in Khera district, which was at that time called Kaira district. He had given this idea in 1942 which now is before us in the shape of AMUL. It is a living example as to how Sardar Saheb had foreseen the way to prosperity of the farmers. I pay my respectful homage to Sardar Saheb. And on 31st October, on National Unity Day, we must remember Sardar Saheb wherever we may be and take a resolve to preserve national unity.
My dear countrymen, during Diwali festivities, Kartik Purnima is also a festival of lights called PRAKASH UTSAV. Guru Nanak Dev, his teachings and blessings are very relevant even now and are a source of inspiration for humanity as a whole. Service, truth and everybody’s well-being was the message of Guru Nanak Dev. Peace, unity and harmony were his principal teachings. Every teaching of Guru Nanak Dev preached that a campaign should be carried on to abolish superstitions, social disparities and social evils from the society. It was then an era when evils such as untouchability, casteism and the chasm between the rich and the poor were at their peak. Guru Nanak Dev picked Bhai Laalo, as his co-worker at that crucial juncture. Let us also follow the light of knowledge bestowed upon us by Guru Nanak Dev which inspires us to end social disparities, exhorts us to do our bit to fight against the evil of disparity.
In our march to achieve ‘Sab Ka Saath, Sab Ka Vikas’, Co-operation from ALL, Development of ALL, we cannot have a better guiding force than Guru Nanak Dev. I pay my deeply felt respectful homage to Guru Nanak Dev on the occasion of the forthcoming Prakashotsav.
My dear countrymen, once again let us dedicate this Diwali to our Jawans. My best wishes and greetings on Diwali to all of you. I wish that all your dreams and resolves get fulfilled in every possible way! May your lives be blessed with success and happiness. Many, many thanks.


26. NOVEMBER 27, 2016
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Last month, all of us were celebrating Diwali. Like every year, this Diwali too, I had gone to the border, to the China border, to celebrate the occasion with our soldiers, our jawans. I celebrated Diwali with ITBP men and army jawans on the lofty heights of the Himalayas. I do it every time, but this Diwali was an entirely different experience. The heartening effect of the novel way in which our 1.25 billion countrymen dedicated this Diwali to soldiers of our army, to our defence forces, was clearly evident on their faces. They appeared charged with emotions, and not just that, the act of our countrymen of sending greeting messages, including the defence forces of the nation in their rejoicing had elicited a wonderful response. And it is not that people merely sent messages. There was an earnest heartfelt connect. Some wrote poems, some drew pictures, a few created cartoons, others made videos; it was as if every home had been transformed into an army post. And when I saw those letters, I used to be amazed at the magnitude of creativity and emotions behind this endeavour. And this gave rise to a thought in MyGov that out of these, selected items could be compiled to make a coffee table book. Work is under way on that. Your collective contribution, the sentiments of soldiers, your emotional universe dedicated to our security forces as expressed in your creativity will form the content of this volume.
A soldier wrote to me – Mr. Prime Minister, we soldiers have all the festivals like Holi and Diwali on the borders. We are devoted to defending the country every moment. Bu we do miss our near and dear ones back home during festivals. But, to tell you the truth, this time we did not feel so. Never did it appear to us even once that we are not at home for the festivities. It felt as if we were celebrating Diwali together with a hundred and twenty five crore Indians.
My dear countrymen, this warmth of emotion, this fervour that has been kindled in the hearts of our defence forces, our soldiers this Diwali, should this be confined to only a few occasions? I appeal to you that we should make it our nature, our characteristic as a society, as a Nation that whether it be a celebration of a festival or any joyous occasion, we should keep the soldiers, the jawans of the military of our nation in our hearts and minds. When the entire nation stands by the armed forces, their might mutiplies a hundred and twenty five crore times.
A few days ago, all Pradhans from the villages of Jammu & Kashmir had come to see me. They were from the Jammu & Kashmir Panchayat Conference. They had come from different villages of the Kashmir valley, there were around 40-50 Pradhans. I got an opportunity to speak to them at length. They had come to discuss a few points on the development of their villages; they had some demands. But when the deliberations began, issues such as conditions in the valley, the law and order situation, the future of children came up in a natural manner. These village Pradhans spoke about these topics with such affection and openness that everything touched my heart. In the course of the conversation, there was also a mention of schools in Kashmir that had been set afire. And I felt these Pradhans were as saddened as our other countrymen were, at that. They too felt that it was not just schools, it was the future of the children, that had been set ablaze. I had urged them to focus on these children’s future, on their return home. I am feeling happy today that these Pradhans, who had come from the Kashmir valley, kept their word in letter and spirit. They returned to their villages and made people from far and wide aware on this issue. Recently, just a few days ago, when the Board examinations were held, 95% of the sons and daughters of Kashmir, the young students appeared in the examinations. The sheer volume of students, who appeared in the Board Examinations, is a clear indication that our children from Jammu & Kashmir are committed to attain newer heights of progress, to build a bright future through the medium of education. For their resolute zeal I congratulate these students and I also felicitate their parents, their kith and kin, their teachers and all the Gram Pradhans as well from the depths of my heart.
My dear brothers and sisters, this time when I asked people for suggestions for ‘Mann ki Baat’, I can say that almost all the suggestions that were received echoed one theme. Everyone wanted me to speak in more detail about the 500 & 1000 rupee notes. On the 8th of November at 8 in the evening, in my Address to the Nation, I had talked about launching a mega campaign to bring about reforms in the country. When I had taken this decision and presented it before you, then also I had said openly that it was not an ordinary decision, it was one fraught with difficulties. It was a very important decision but implementation of that decision is equally important. And I had also foreseen that this would result in all of us having to face various new difficulties in our day-to-day lives. And I had stated then also that this decision was so enormous that it would take us at least 50 days to come out of its after effects and only then would we be able to move towards normalcy. These maladies have been afflicting us for the past 70 years and the campaign for getting rid of these can never be an easy task. I can very well understand the problems you are going through! But when I see your support, when I look at your co-operation; although numerous efforts are on to misguide you, despite that, and despite witnessing some disturbing incidents, you have whole heartedly comprehended the path of righteousness and truth, you have favourably accepted this step taken in the best national interest.
500 and 1000 rupee notes and such a vast country, wide proliferation of currencies, billions and trillions of bank notes and amidst that, this decision – the whole world is minutely observing, every economist is analysing it, evaluating it. The whole world is watching – will hundred and twenty-five crore Indians finally attain success after facing numerous hardships? This question may be there in the world community. However, India has nothing but faith and faith only and supreme confidence in her hundred and twenty five crore countrymen that they will certainly fulfill their resolve. And our country will emerge shining like gold does after a test by fire. And the reason for that is you, the citizens of this country. The route to this success also has been paved only because of you.
Across the country, central government, state governments, all units of the local self government institutions, one lakh thirty thousand bank branches, lakhs of bank employees, over one and a half lakh post offices, over a lakh Bank-Mitras are relentlessly at work, day and night, with complete dedication. In the midst of immense and varied stress, all these individuals are working hard, maintaining a calm and composed demeanour, taking it as a Yagya of Service to the Nation, an attempt towards a great transformation.
They begin work early in the morning, not knowing when they will wind up at night. Everyone is busy working. And as a precise consequence of this diligence, there are clear indications that India will succeed handsomely in this endeavour. And I have seen that in the midst of such difficulties, all personnel of banks and post offices are working very hard. And when it comes to the practice of humanity, they appear two steps ahead. Someone told me that in Khandwa, an old gentleman met with an accident. Money was needed urgently. This came to the knowledge of local bank personnel, and I was happy to learn that they personally carried and handed over cash at his home, for help in treatment. Innumerable such incidents come to light everyday through television, media, newspapers and mutual conversations. I profusely thank all such compatriots who have striven hard to perform this MAHAYAGYA, and lived up to the lofty virtue of PURUSHARTH. The greatest validation of SHAKTI, strength, comes when the same is put to test. I distinctly remember, when the Prime Minister’s Jan Dhan Yojana was launched, bank personnel earnestly and zealously shouldered their responsibilities and showed that they could achieve what had not been accomplished during the last 70 years. Their capabilities were manifested. Today, once again, they have accepted the challenge and I do believe that the steely resolve of one hundred and twenty five crore countrymen, their collective demonstration of PURUSHARTH will go a long way in investing our nation with a new power and strength on its path of progress.
But vices are so widespread and deep-rooted that even today there are people whose vicious habits refuse to die. Even now, some people think that they can re-introduce into the system, money from corruption, black money, unaccounted wealth and Benami money (money in unknown person’s name), using some route or the other. They seek illegal means to save their ill-gotten wealth. The saddest part is that, for this too, they have chosen to misuse the poor, the underprivileged people. By misguiding the poor, enticing them through the vices of avarice and temptation, wrongfully pumping money into their bank accounts, or getting them to undertake some wrong activities, some people are trying to save their black money. I want to tell such people today – whether you reform or not is up to you, whether you respect and follow the law or do otherwise is again up to you; of course, the law will take its own course to decide on the requisite action; but, for God’s sake, please do not play with the lives of poor people. Do not do anything that may bring the names of the poor on record for wrong reasons and land my dear poor people into trouble during the investigation later on account of your foul deeds. And the law regarding Benami property that has been enacted and is being implemented is very stringent and it is going to be extremely tough on wrong doers. The government does not wish that our countrymen should face undue hardships.
One Mr. Aashish has called me up and appreciated the fight against corruption and black money through the action on 500 and 1000 Rupee notes: –
“Sir, Namaste. My name is Aashish Paare. I am an ordinary citizen of Village Tiraali of Tehsil Tiraali in District Harda of Madhya Pradesh. Your move to demonetize 1000 and 500 rupee notes is a commendable step. I wish that in Mann Ki Baat, you quote instances of people, who, despite facing hardships, have welcomed this step for the nation’s progress. This will further enhance people’s zeal. A cashless economy is necessary for nation building. And I am with the whole country on this. I am truly happy that you have done away with 1000 and 500 rupee notes.”
I have received a similar call from Mr. Yellappa Velankar Ji from Karnataka: –
“Modi Ji, Namaste. I am calling from a village in Koppal district of Karnataka. My name is Yellappa Velankar. I want to thank you wholeheartedly because you had said that good days will come, but nobody had ever thought that you would take such a big step. You have taught a lesson to black money mongers and the corrupt through the demonetization of 1000 and 500 rupee notes. For each and every citizen of India there could be no better days than these. For this I thank you from the core of my heart.”
We get to know certain things through media, through the people and through government sources which add to our enthusiasm for work. It gives us such a great happiness and a sense of pride to know that the common man in my country has such a wonderful capability. A restaurant on the National Highway-6 in Akola in Maharashtra has displayed a board saying that if you have only old currency notes in the pocket and want to have food, please, do not worry about money and do not leave hungry from this place. Please, do have your food and pay later whenever you happen to pass through this place. So people go and eat there and make payments on their next visit after 2, 4 or 6 days. This is the strength of my country which encompasses the spirit of service, of sacrifice and also of genuineness and honesty.
During elections, I used to have ‘चाय पर चर्चा’, that is discussions over tea and this got publicised around the whole world. People in many countries of the world even learnt to utter the phrase – ‘Chai Par Charcha’. But, I did not know ‘Chai Par Charcha’ could be linked to a marriage also. I learnt that on 17th November, a marriage was solemnised with ‘Chai Par Charcha’ in Surat. One daughter at Surat in Gujarat served only tea to all the guests who had come to her wedding. There was no big function, no feast or banquet because there was a shortage of cash due to demonetisation. Guests from the bridegroom’s side also gracefully accepted it as their ceremonial welcome. Bharat Maaroo and Dakshaa Parmar from Surat, through their marriage, have made a valuable contribution in the ongoing fight against corruption and black money and set up a very inspiring example. I convey my blessings to the newlyweds Bharat and Dakshaa and profusely compliment them also for having transformed their wedding occasion into an offering for the great task and thereby converting it into a new opportunity. Whenever confronted by such difficult times, people do succeed in exploring and finding good avenues and solutions.
I once saw in the news on TV, when I had returned late in the night, a report about a small village called Dhekiajulli (धेकियाजुली) in Assam, where tea workers reside. These tea workers get their wages on weekly basis. Now, what they did when they received a 2000 rupee note as wages? Four women from the neighborhood got together and jointly made purchases and made the payment with the 2000 Rupee note; they did not need small currency as they had jointly made their purchases and had decided that they would settle accounts later when they were to meet next week. People are themselves finding ways. And just look at this change. The government received a message that people of tea gardens in Assam are demanding setting up of ATMs in their areas. See, how the village life is also getting transformed. Some people are getting instant benefits from this campaign. The nation will reap these benefits in the days to come but some people have got benefits instantly. On asking how things were going on, I got to know about the impact in small towns. On the basis of reports received from about 45-50 cities, I gathered that demonetisation had encouraged people there to pay their arrears accumulated due to non-payment of dues earlier; many people were in the habit of not making tax payments such as water tax, electricity bills, etc., they just did not pay. Now all of us know very well that the poor people always like to clear their dues 2-3 days in advance. It is the well-off people, who do not pay their taxes and bills as they have higher connections and know that nobody is going to ask or do anything against them. Thus there are big arrears of payments, which remain pending. All municipalities receive hardly 50% of their tax revenues. But, this time after the decision taken on the 8th instant, people rushed to deposit their old currency notes. 47 urban institutions had received about 3 to 3.5 thousand crore rupees in taxes last year. You will be surprised and also happy to know that during this one week, these institutions received 13 thousand crore rupees. Imagine the difference – from 3 to 3.5 thousand crores to 13 thousand crores. And, that too with the self initiative of those making payments. Now that these municipalities have received 4 times the money, it is quite natural that poor localities and slums will get better drainage facilities, better water supply and better Aanganbari system. Many such examples are coming to light where direct benefits of this demonetisation can clearly be seen.
Brothers and sisters, our villages and our farmers are strong pillars of our economy. Every citizen is making requisite adjustments amidst the difficulties as a result of the new changes. But, I especially wish to compliment the farmers of our country. I was just gathering data of the sowing of this crop season. I am glad that be it wheat, be it pulses, be it oilseeds, the data received till 20th November indicates that sowing has increased substantially as compared to sowing during the last year. Our farmers have discovered new avenues amidst the present difficulties. The government has also taken many important decisions, wherein priority has been accorded to our farmers and villages. Despite these measures, some difficulties persist but I am confident that our farmer who bravely faces every difficulty, including natural calamities, is standing firm in the face of present odds also.
Small traders and businessmen of our country provide employment opportunities besides adding to the economic activities. In the last budget we had taken an important decision that just like the big malls, small shopkeepers in the villages will also be allowed to operate round the clock and no rule will stop them from doing so because I felt that when the big malls can function 24 hours, why the poor village-shopkeepers should not get the same facility? A number of initiatives were taken to grant them loans under Mudra Yojana. These small traders were provided loans worth lakhs and crores of rupees under Mudra Yojana because there are crores of such small traders and they impart momentum to the business activities worth billions of rupees. But naturally they too had to face difficulties due to this decision. However, I have seen that these small businessmen too have kept providing services to their customers in their own ways through the use of technology such as Mobile App, Mobile Bank and Credit Card and on the basis of mutual trust also. And, I want to tell our small trader brothers and sisters that this is a ripe opportunity for them too to make their entry into the digital world. You too download Apps of Banks on your mobile phones. You too keep a POS machine for transactions in Credit Cards. You too learn to do cashless business. You can see how the big malls are expanding their business with the help of latest technology. A small trader can also expand the business with the help of this user friendly technology. There is no possibility of things going wrong, but there certainly is an opportunity to grow. I invite you all. You can make a very big contribution in creating a cashless society. You can create a full-fledged banking facility on your mobile phone and there are many ways now to run our business without using paper currency. There are technological methods which are safe, secure and instantaneous. I want that you not only extend your cooperation in making this campaign successful but also lead the process of transformation and I have full confidence that you can be the leader for this change. I am sure you can handle the entire business in your village using this technology.
I want to tell my worker brothers and sisters too that you have faced heavy exploitation. Wages shown on paper are much higher than the wages actually paid to you. If sometimes full wages are paid, someone stands outside to forcibly take his cut and the worker is compelled to accept this as his fate. We want that under this new system you should have a bank account; your wages should be deposited directly into your bank so that payment of minimum wages is ensured. You get your due wages in full, without anybody extracting a cut. No one should exploit you. And, once the money is credited into your bank account, you can use your mobile phone as an e-wallet and you do not need any hi-fi smart phone for this, because even with the help of your ordinary mobile phone itself you can make purchases from the neighbourhood shops and make payments as well. That is why, I specially urge our worker brothers and sisters to participate in this scheme because after all I took such a momentous decision for the benefit of the poor people, the farmers, the workers, the deprived and the suffering people of the country and, hence, these benefits must reach them.
I specially want to talk to our young friends today. We keep telling with great fanfare the whole world that India is a country where 65% of the population is below the age of 35 years. I know, dear young men and women of my country, that you have liked my decision. I also know that you support my decision. I even know that you are making a big contribution in positively taking this mission forward. But dear friends, you are my true soldiers, my true partners. We have got a wonderful chance to serve our mother India and to take our country to new economic heights. Dear youngsters, can you please help me? You will be with me but that alone is not enough. The older generation does not have the exposure and experience of the new world which you possess. Possibly your elder brother and even your parents and uncles and aunts also may not know. You know what an ‘App’ is, what ‘online banking’ is and how ‘online ticket booking’ is done. For you these are routine things and you also make use of them. But, the great task that the country wants to accomplish today is the realisation of our dream of a ‘Cashless Society’. It is true that a hundred percent cashless society is not possible. But why should India not make a beginning in creating a ‘less-cash society’? Once we embark on our journey to create a ‘less-cash society’, the goal of ‘cashless society’ will not remain very far. And I require your physical help, your own time, your own resolve and I am sure that you will not disappoint me because we are the ones nurturing the desire to change for better the life of the poor people of India. You know how many opportunities there are today for a cashless society, for digital banking or for mobile banking. Every bank provides online banking facility. Every bank in India has its own ‘mobile App’. Every bank has its wallet. Wallet simply means an e-purse. Various types of cards are available. Under Jan Dhan Yojana, crores of poor families in India have Rupay Cards. Used scarcely earlier, after 8th November the poor people have started using Rupay Cards and this usage has seen almost 300% surge. Just as there is a prepaid card for mobile phones, prepaid cards are also available in banks to facilitate expenditure. UPI is a very useful platform for carrying on trade activities which enables you to make purchases, send money and even receive money. And, this procedure is as simple as sending messages through WhatsApp. Even an illiterate person today knows how to send and also forward WhatsApp messages. Not only this, with the simplification of technology, we do not require any big smart phones for this purpose.
Cash can be transferred even with a phone with ordinary features. A washerman, vegetable vendor, milk supplier, newspaper vendor, tea stall owner or a chanaa vendor, everyone can easily use this facility. I have provided further impetus to simplifying this system even more. All banks are engaged in this and are doing their best. We have now cancelled the online surcharge and you might have seen in the newspapers during last 2-4 days that all extra charges for such cards have been abolished in order to strengthen the movement towards achieving a ‘cashless society’.
My dear young friends, despite all these things, there is an entire generation which is ignorant in these matters. And I know it very well that all of you are actively contributing in this great task. The kind of creative messages that you send on WhatsApp – slogans, poems, anecdotes, cartoons, new imagination, jokes – I am seeing all these signifying the creative power of our young generation amidst the present challenges. This is the speciality of our ‘Bharat Bhoomi’, our motherland where GITA was created on a battlefield. Today when we are passing through the times of such gigantic changes, your original creativity is manifesting itself within you. But, my dear young friends, I once again tell you that I need your help in this task. Yes, yes, yes – I repeat that I NEED YOUR HELP and I am very sure that millions of young people of our country will accomplish this tremendous task.
You just do one thing, take a resolve today itself that you will yourself become a part of the ‘cashless society’. Every technology needed for online spending will definitely be available on your mobile phone. But not only this, you must devote half an hour, one hour or two hours daily to educate at least 10 families about what this technology is, how this technology is to be used, how to download the Apps of your banks, how to spend money from one’s account, how to make payment to shopkeepers. Also teach the shopkeepers to conduct their business with this technology. You have to voluntarily lend your leadership to this great campaign, this Maha Abhiyan, to create a ‘cashless society’, to eradicate corruption from our country, to abolish the scourge of black money and to help people in overcoming their difficulties and problems. Once you teach the poor people about the usage of Rupay Card, they will shower their blessings upon you. When you teach the common citizen these new techniques, he will probably become free from all his worries. And if all the young people of India join in this great endeavour, I don’t think it will take much time. We can emerge and take our place in the world as a new modern India within a period of one month. And you can do this through your mobile phone by going to 10 houses daily and bringing 10 families daily under the ambit of this campaign. I invite you – come, do not just support this transformation but become one of its leading soldiers and ensure that we achieve the desired transformation. We shall carry forward this struggle to free our country from the evils of corruption and black money. There are many countries in the world where the youth have changed the nation’s life and it has to be accepted that it is the youth which brings about the great changes, which creates revolutions. Kenya made a resolve and set up a mobile based system M-PESA, adopted appropriate technology which was named M-PESA and today in Kenya, in this region of Africa, total business is ready to shift to this system. That country has brought about a big revolution.
My dear young friends, I once again earnestly appeal to you to take forward this campaign. I invite you to work for this mission individually and collectively in every school, in every college, in every university, in NCC and in NSS. We must take this forward. We have got an opportunity to render a great service to our nation; this chance must not be missed.
Dear brothers and sisters, today is the birth anniversary of a great poet of our country – Shriman Harivansh Rai Bachchan Ji and on this occasion today, Shriman Amitabh Bachchan Ji has given a slogan for Swachhta Mission. You must have noticed, that Amitabh Ji, the most popular actor of this century, has been whole-heartedly promoting the campaign for cleanliness. It appears as if the subject of cleanliness has become so dear to him that even on his father’s birth anniversary he remembered the Cleanliness Mission. He has quoted one line from a poem written by Harivansh Rai Bachchan Ji wherein he said: “Mitti Ka Tann, Masti Ka Mann, Kshan Bhar Jeewan, Mera Parichay. (feV~Vh dk ru] eLrh dk eu] {k.kHkj thou] esjk ifjp;)” Harivansh Rai Ji used to give his introduction through this line. His son Shriman Amitabh Ji, who has the cleanliness mission running in his veins, has written to me –“Swachchh Tann, Swachchh Mann, Swachchh Bharat, Mera Parichay. LoPN ru] LoPN eu] LoPN Hkkjr] esjk ifjp; ” based on Harivansh Rai Ji’s lines. I respectfully bow to Harivansh Rai Ji. I also thank Shriman Amitabh Ji to connect in such a warm manner with ‘Mann Ki Baat’ and for taking forward the Cleanliness Campaign.
My dear countrymen, now your views and your sentiments on ‘Mann Ki Baat’ though your letters, on MyGov, on NaarendraModiApp keep me constantly connected with you. Presently Mann Ki Baat is broadcast at 11 AM but we are going to start its broadcast in regional languages immediately after my Hindi broadcast. I am grateful to Akashvani for taking up this initiative which will definitely provide an opportunity to connect our countrymen even in those areas, where Hindi language is not prevalent. Many thanks to all of you.


27. DECEMBER 25, 2016
My fellow countrymen, Namaskar, many felicitations and season’s greetings to you on the occasion of Christmas. Today is the day to give importance in our lives to service, sacrifice and compassion. Jesus had said – “The poor do not need our favours but our acceptance with affection.” In the Gospel According to Saint Luke, it is written that – “Jesus not only served the poor but also praised the service done by the poor,” and this is what real empowerment is. A tale associated with this incident is also very popular. It has been mentioned in that story that Jesus was standing near the treasury of a temple; many rich people came and donated bountifully; then a poor widow came and parted with only two copper coins. Now just two copper coins really do not amount to much. Thus it was natural that there was a lot of curiosity in the minds of the disciples gathered there. Then, Jesus declared that the widow was the greatest of those donors because while the others had donated substantially, that widow had given away all she possessed.
Today, 25th December, is also the birth anniversary of Mahamana Madan Mohan Malviyaji, who kindled resolve and self confidence in the psyche of the Indian people and gave a new direction to modern education. My most sincere and heartfelt tributes to Malviyaji on his birth anniversary. About two days ago, I had the opportunity to launch many a developmental work in Banaras, the sacred workplace of Malviyaji. I also laid the foundation stone of Mahamana Madan Mohan Malviya Cancer Centre in BHU at Varanasi. This Cancer Centre is going to be a boon for the people of not only eastern Uttar Pradesh but for the people of Jharkhand and Bihar also.
Today is also the birthday of Bharat Ratna and former Prime Minister Venerable Atal Bihari Vajpayee Ji. This country can never forget Atalji’s contributions. Under his leadership, the country proudly grew in stature in the field of nuclear power also. Whether in the role of a party leader, Member of Parliament, a minister or the Prime Minister, Atalji always established an ideal. I salute Atalji on his birthday and pray to God for his good health. As a party worker I had the privilege of working with Atalji. Many memories emerge before my eyes. This morning when I tweeted, I shared a video, in which you can see for yourself how as a small party worker one had the fortune of having affection showered upon him by Atalji.
Today, on Christmas Day, as a gift the countrymen are going to get the benefit of two schemes. In a way it is the beginning of two new schemes. Throughout the entire country, be it villages or towns, the educated or the illiterate, there is an atmosphere of curiosity as to what is cashless, how cashless business can take place, how can one make purchases without using cash! Everybody wants to understand and learn from each other. To encourage this trend, to strengthen mobile banking and to inculcate the habit of making e-payments, the Government of India is launching from today encouragement schemes for consumers as well as traders. To encourage customers, the scheme is ‘Lucky Grahak Yojana’ and to encourage traders the scheme is ‘Digi Dhan Vyapaar Yojana’.
Today, on 25th December, as a Christmas gift, fifteen thousand people will get rewards through a draw system, whereby each of the fifteen thousand winners will have one thousand rupees into their accounts and this will be not for today only; starting today this scheme will continue for the next 100 days. Everyday fifteen thousand people are going to receive rewards of one thousand rupees each. In the next 100 days, lakhs of families are going to receive crores of rupees as gift, but you will be entitled to this gift only if you make use of mobile banking, e-banking, RuPay Card, UPI, USSD – such means and methods of digital payment. The draw for rewards will be done based on your use of such digital payment methods. In addition, there would be a grand draw once every week for such customers in which the prize money will be in lakhs of rupees and three months later on April 14th, on the occasion of the birth anniversary of Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar, there would be a mega bumper draw where rewards would be in crores of rupees.
‘Digi Dhan Vyapar Yojana’ is mainly for traders and businessmen. Traders should adopt this scheme themselves and should encourage their customers too in order to make their business cashless. Such traders will also be rewarded separately and there would be thousands of these rewards. The traders will run their business activities smoothly and will also have an opportunity to win rewards. This scheme has been designed keeping all sections of society in mind, with a special focus on the poor and the lower middle class segments. Therefore only those will get its benefits who make a purchase worth more than 50 rupees but less than three thousand rupees. Those who make purchases of more than three thousand rupees will not be entitled to rewards under this scheme.
Even the poor people can use USSD on simple feature or ordinary mobile phones to buy and sell goods as well as make payments and thus all of them can also become prospective beneficiaries of this reward scheme. In rural areas too, people can buy or sell through AEPS and they can also win rewards. Many will be surprised to know that now there are about 30 Crore, i.e. 300 million RuPay Cards in India, out of which 200 million RuPay Cards belong to poor families which have ‘Jan Dhan’ accounts. These 300 million people can immediately become part of this rewards scheme. I have confidence that the countrymen will evince interest in this system and if you enquire from the young people around you, they would surely be aware of these things and on your asking will tell you about these. Come on, if there is a child studying in 10th or 12th standard in your family, he or she will also be able to teach you well about this. It is as simple as sending WhatsApp messages on the mobile.
My dear countrymen, I feel delighted to learn that the awareness about how to use technology, making e-payments, making online payments is spreading very fast. During the past few days, the cashless transactions, or cashless trading has increased by 200 to 300%. To give cashless trading a big impetus, Government of India has taken a very major decision. The business community, our traders can well comprehend how momentous this decision is. Those businessmen who adopt digital transactions, who develop online payment process instead of cash transactions in their trade activities will get Income Tax rebate.
I congratulate all the states and union territories, who have promoted this campaign in their own way. The Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh, Mr. Chandrababu Naidu is the head of a committee which is considering various schemes under this. However, I have seen that the governments also have initiated and implemented many schemes. I’ve been told that Assam Government has decided to grant a 10% discount on property tax and business license fee if payments are made through digital transaction. The branches of Grameen, that is, Rural Banks there getting 75% of their customers to make at least two digital transactions between January and March will get 50 thousands rupees rewards from the government. They have announced that under the ‘Uttam Panchayat for Digi-Transaction’, rewards of 5 lakh rupees will be given to villages doing 100% digital transaction till 31st March, 2017. Assam Government has decided to reward 5 thousand rupees to the first 10 farmers as ‘Digital Krishak Shiromani’, who will buy seeds and fertilizers entirely through digital payments. I congratulate Assam Government and also all those state governments who have taken such initiatives.
A number of organisations have also successfully carried out many experiments to promote digital transactions amongst the rural folk and poor farmers. I have been told that GNFC or Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited, which primarily manufactures fertilizers, has installed a thousand PoS machines for sale of fertilizers for the convenience of farmers and in just a few days 35 thousand farmers were sold 5 lakh sacs of fertilizers on digital payment and this was accomplished in only two weeks! And the interesting fact is that compared to last year the fertilizer sales of GNFC have gone up by 27 percent.
Brothers and sisters, the informal sector occupies a major segment in our economy and in our pattern of life and mostly these people are paid wages for their labour and hard work in cash. They are paid their salaries in cash and we know that due to this, they are exploited also. If they are to receive 100 rupees, they get only 80 rupees, if they are to be paid 80 rupees, they are given only 50 rupees. They are deprived of facilities like insurance and those associated with health sector. But now the practice of cashless payment is being adopted; the money is being directly deposited into banks. In a way, the informal sector is getting converted into the formal sector, exploitation is coming to an end, the cut, which had to be paid earlier, has stopped now and it has become possible for the worker, the artisan, such poor persons to get their full amount of money. In addition, they are also becoming entitled to the other benefits due to them.
Our country is blessed with the maximum number of young people. Thus, we are favourably placed for using technology. A country like India should be ahead of everybody else in this field. Our youth have benefitted quite a lot from ‘Start-Ups’. This digital movement is a golden opportunity for our youth. They should impart to this as much strength as they can with their new ideas, technology and processes. But we must also connect with the drive to rid the country of black money and corruption with all our might.
My dear countrymen, I request every month before ‘Mann Ki Baat’ that you please give your suggestions, share your thoughts; and of the thousands of such suggestions received this time on MyGov, on NarendraModiApp, I can definitely say that 80 to 90% suggestions were pertaining to the war against corruption and black money, there was mention of demonetization. After I examined all the suggestions, I can say that these can macroscopically be roughly divided into three categories. Some have written in detail about people facing difficulties and encountering inconveniences. The other group of correspondents have stressed that this is such a good work being carried out for the welfare of the country, such a sacred task but they have also noted that in spite of this there are many scams being committed and new avenues of dishonesty are being explored. The third group is the one which has, while wholeheartedly supporting the action being taken, clearly stressed that this fight must be carried forward; corruption and black money must be completely destroyed and if this requires even more tough steps to be taken, those must be taken. We have many people writing this most emphatically.
I am thankful to the countrymen for helping me by writing these innumerable letters to me. Shriman Gurumani Kewal has written on MyGov – “This step of reigning in black money is praiseworthy. We citizens are facing some difficulties, but we are all fighting against corruption and we are happy that we are making a contribution in this fight. We are battling corruption, black money etc on the lines of Military Forces.” The sentiment behind Gurumani Kewalji’s text is being echoed in every nook and corner of the country. All of us are experiencing it. When the people face problems, undergo hardships, rare will be a fellow human being who will not empathise. I feel as much pain as you do. But when a task is taken up with a noble objective, to realise a lofty intent, with a clear conscience, the countrymen stay firm courageously amidst all these trials and tribulations. These people are the real Agents of Change, pioneers of transformation. I thank people for one more reason. They have not only braved hardships, but have also powerfully given a retort to those limited few who have been trying to mislead them.
So many rumours were spread, even the fight against corruption and black money was sought to be tainted with shades of communalism. Somebody spread a rumour that the spelling on the currency note was faulty, someone said salt prices had spiraled, someone proclaimed that the 2000 rupee note would also be withdrawn, even 500 and 100 rupee denominations notes were rumoured to be on their way out. But I have seen that despite rampant rumour mongering, citizens have stood firm with their faith intact. And not just that, many people came to the fore and through their creativity and intelligence, exposed the rumour mongers, brought out the falsity of the rumours and established the truth. I salute this great ability of the people also from the core of my heart.
My dear countrymen, I am experiencing one thing every moment. When a hundred and twenty five crore countrymen are standing by you, nothing is impossible. The people represent the will of the Almighty and their blessings become His blessings. I thank the people of this country and salute them for participating in this Mahayagya against black money and corruption with utmost zeal. It was my earnest wish that the ongoing campaign against corruption and black money, including the realm of political parties and political funding, be discussed extensively in the Parliament. Had the House functioned properly, there would have been comprehensive deliberation. Some people are spreading rumours that political parties enjoy all kinds of concessions. These people are absolutely in the wrong. The law applies equally to all. Whether it is an individual, an organisation or a political party, everyone has to abide by law and one will have to. People, who cannot endorse corruption and black money openly, resort to searching for faults of the government relentlessly.
Another issue which comes up is this. Why are rules changed time and again? This government is for the sake of the people. The government continuously endeavours to take a feedback from them. What are the areas of difficulty for the people? What are the rules that are creating hindrances? And what are the possible solutions? The government, being a sensitive government, amends rules as required, keeping the convenience of the people as its foremost consideration, so that citizens are not subjected to hardships. On the other hand, as I’d said earlier, on the 8th to be precise, this drive, this war is an extraordinary one. For the past 70 years, what kind of forces are involved in this murky enterprise of perfidy and corruption? How mighty are they? When I have resolved to wage battle against them, they too come up with new tactics everyday to thwart the government’s efforts. To counter these new offensives, we too have to devise appropriate new responses and antidotes. When the opponents keep on trying out new tactics, we have to counteract decisively, since we have resolved to eradicate the corrupt, shady businesses and black money.
On the other hand, many people have mentioned in their letters all kinds of wrongdoing which are going on; how newer wily ways and means are being devised. In this context, I offer my heartiest salutations to my dear countrymen for one very remarkable thing. These days you must be seeing on T.V. and newspapers, everyday many new people are being taken into custody, currency notes are being seized, raids are being carried out. Influential persons are being caught. How has all this been made possible? Should I let out the secret? The secret is that my sources of such information are people themselves. Information being received from common citizens is many times higher than that being obtained through government machinery. And we are by and large being successful in our operations on account of the awareness and alertness that the people have displayed. Can anyone imagine the level of risk, which the aware citizen of my country is taking to expose such elements! The information received has largely proved to be fruitful. For those of you wanting to share such information, you can send it on an e-mail address set up by the government for this purpose. You can also provide it on MyGov. The government is committed to fight all such wrongdoings and maladies. And when we have your active support, this fight becomes much easier.
Thirdly, there is another group of letter writers, also existing in large numbers. They say – Modiji, do not feel exhausted, do not stop and take the most stringent measures that you can. Now that you have chosen this path, the journey should culminate at its intended and logical destination. I specially thank writers of such letters, since their writing exudes a certain confidence, fortified with blessings. I sincerely assure you that this is in no way going to be a full stop. This is just the beginning. We have to win this battle and the question of feeling exhausted or stopping simply does not arise. Armed with the good wishes of a hundred and twenty five crore countrymen, there is no question of a retreat. You are possibly aware of a Law about Benami Property in our country which came into being in 1988, but neither were its rules ever framed, nor was it notified. It just lay dormant gathering dust. We have retrieved it and turned it into an incisive law against ‘Benami Property’. In the coming days, this law will also become operational. For the benefit of the Nation, for the benefit of the people, whatever needs to be done will be accorded our top priority.
My dear countrymen, I had mentioned in last month’s ‘Mann Ki Baat’ that even amidst these hardships our farmers toiled tirelessly and broke last year’s record in sowing. It is a sign of good times for the agricultural sector. The diligent hard work by this country’s workers, and farmers, and youth has scripted a new chapter of success with flying colours. Recently India proudly inscribed her name in various sectors of the global economic scenario. It is solely on account of the tireless exertions of our countrymen that on myriad indicators, India has charted an upward trajectory in global rankings. India’s ranking has gone up in the Doing Business Report of the World Bank. We are trying our best to raise the level of the business practices in India to match the best practices in the world on equal footing. And we are succeeding in that. In the World Investment Report released by UNCTAD, India’s position has risen to third in the Top Prospective Host Economies for 2016-18. In the Global Competitive Report of the World Economic Forum, India has made a big leap upwards by 32 ranks. In the Global Innovation Index 2016, we have moved up 16 rungs and in the Logistics Performance Index 2016 of the World Bank, we have risen by 19 ranks. There are many reports whose evaluation indicate that India is taking rapid strides ahead.
My dear countrymen, this time the session of Parliament became the object of ire of our countrymen. Indignation was expressed everywhere about the activities in the Parliament. The President and Vice President also explicitly expressed their displeasure. But even in such a situation, sometimes good things also take place which create a sense of satisfaction in the mind. Amid the din in Parliament, an excellent task was accomplished, which has not attracted due attention of the country. Brothers and sisters, today with pride and joy I would like to mention that a bill in connection with my government’s mission on Divyangjan, that is, differently or specially abled people was passed in Parliament. For this, I extend my heartfelt gratitude to all the members of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. On behalf of millions of Divyangjan of the country I express my thanks. Our government is committed to the welfare of Divyaangs. Personally too, I have strived to lend momentum to this campaign. My intention was to ensure that the Divyangjan secure their due rights and also the honour and dignity that they are entitled to. Our efforts and our trust were fortified by our Divyaang brothers and sisters when they returned with 4 medals from the Paralympics. With their triumph, not only did they do the Nation proud, they pleasantly surprised many people through their capabilities and prowess. Our Divyaang brothers and sisters are an invaluable heritage, a precious endowment, just as every citizen of the country is. Today I am immensely delighted that the passing of this Law for the welfare of the Divyaangjan will open up additional avenues of employment for them. In government jobs, the extent of reservation for them has been enhanced to 4%. Special provisions have been provided for in this Law for their education, facilities and also for grievances. The extent of sensitivity of the government towards the Divyaangs can be assessed by the fact that during the last two years, the central government set up 4350 camps for Divyaangs, spent 352 crore rupees for distributing implements to 5,80,000 Divyaang brothers and sisters. The government has passed the new law in consonance with the spirit expressed by the United Nations. Earlier there were seven Divyaang categories; now adding fourteen new categories this has been expanded to twenty-one categories. Many such new categories of Divyaangs have been included thereby providing them for the first time justice and opportunities. For example, categories like Thalassemia, Parkinson’s, or for that matter Dwarfism have been included.
My young friends, during the last few weeks, news items coming in from the world of sports have made all of us proud. Being Indians, it is but natural for us to feel elated. In the cricket series against England, India has triumphed 4-0. In this, the performance of some of the younger players deserves a special word of praise. The young Karun Nair scored a triple century and K. L. Rahul played a brilliant 199 run innings. Test captain Virat Kohli batted extremely well and also provided inspiring leadership. Indian Cricket team’s off-spin bowler R. Ashwin has been declared ‘Cricketer of the Year’ as well as ‘Best Test Cricketer’ by the ICC for the year 2016. My heartiest congratulations and many good wishes go to all of them. After a gap of 15 years, there was good news, in fact grand news from the hockey arena too. The Junior Hockey Team lifted the World Cup. This festive occasion came to us after fifteen years as the Junior Hockey team won the World Cup. Heartiest congratulations to these young players for this grand feat. This achievement is a very good omen for the future of our Hockey team. Last month our Women players too won laurels. Indian Women’s Hockey Team won the Asian Champions Trophy and just a few days ago in the under-18 Asia Cup, Indian Women’s Hockey Team secured the Bronze Medal. I congratulate all our Cricket and Hockey team players from the core of my heart.
My dear countrymen, may 2017 be a year full of joy and enthusiasm; may all your resolves be crowned with success; let us scale newer heights of progress; may the poorest of the poor get an opportunity to lead a better and fuller life of happiness and contentment; may 2017 be like this for all of us. For the year 2017, my best and brightest wishes to all my countrymen. Many, many thanks.


28. JANUARY 29, 2017
29. FEBRUARY 26, 2017
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Winter is on its way out. Vasant, the season of spring has just started to step into our lives. After the departure of PATJHAD, when old and withered leaves fall, new leaves begin to sprout on the trees. Flowers bloom. Gardens and orchards sport a verdant green. The melodious chirping of birds warms the cockles of our hearts. Not just flowers, fruits too appear to be shining bathed in the sun rays on tree branches. The flower heads of the summer fruit mango manifest themselves in the spring season itself. At the same time bright yellow flowers of mustard swaying in their fields kindle hope in the hearts of the farmers. Blossoming of bright red Jungle Flame flowers, better known as Tesu or Palash heralds the advent of Holi. Amir Khusro has portrayed these moments of change of season in a very interesting manner. Amir Khusro has written:
Phool rahi sarson sakal ban
Ambwa phoote, Tesu phoole
Koyal bole, daar daar,
that is,
Behold the mustard blooming everywhere, all around Here the inflorescence on the mango tree, there the Jungle Flame blossoms
The nightingale can’t help but sing merrily on the branches.
When nature is at her joyous best, when the season is enchanting, we human beings too enjoy this to the fullest. The festivals of Vasant Panchami, Mahashivratri and Holi, impart hues of happiness to a person’s life. In an ambience of love, brotherhood and humanity, we are about to bid adieu to the last month of Phalgun and are eagerly awaiting to welcome the arrival of the new month of Chaitra. The Ritu of Vasant, that is, the season of spring is indeed the confluence of these two months.
At the outset, I express my gratitude to lakhs of citizens of our country for sending in a multitude of suggestions when I ask for them before ‘Mann Ki Baat’. On the NarendraModiApp, on Twitter, on Facebook, by post – I thank all of you for that.
Shobha Jalan has written to me on the NarendraModiApp that many in the public are not aware of the achievements of ISRO. And therefore she wants me to provide some information on the recent launch of 104 satellites and the Interceptor Missile. Shobha Ji, thank you very much for paying attention to this shining example of India’s pride. Whether it is eradicating poverty, preventing diseases, connecting with the world, or disseminating knowledge and information, technology and science have made a mark for themselves. 15th February, 2017 is a day of immense pride for India. Our scientists have brought laurels to the nation, witnessed by the whole world. And we know that over the last few years, ISRO has accomplished various unprecedented missions with flying colours. After the successful mission of sending Mangalyaan to planet Mars, recently ISRO scripted a world record in the arena of space. In a mega mission, ISRO has successfully launched 104 satellites simultaneously into space. These satellites belonged to various countries such as America, Israel, Kazakhstan, Netherlands, Switzerland, UAE and, of course, India. India has created history by becoming the first country to launch successfully 104 satellites into space at one go. And what is further heartening is the fact that this was PSLV’s 38th successive successful launch. This is a historic achievement for not just ISRO but for all of India. This cost effective, efficient space programme of ISRO has become a marvel for the entire world; the world has admired this success of Indian scientists of India whole-heartedly.
Brother & sisters, one out of these 104 satellites is extremely important. It is Cartosat 2D, which is India’s satellite and the pictures clicked through it will be of great help in mapping of resources and infrastructure, evaluating development and planning for urban development. Particularly for my farmer brothers and sisters, our new Satellite Cartosat 2D will be immensely helpful on a whole lot of subjects such as knowing how much water is there in our existing water sources, how this should be best put to use, what things to keep in mind in this regard. Almost immediately after its launch, our satellite has sent back some pictures. It has commenced functioning. It is also a matter of exultation for us that this entire campaign was led and steered by our young scientists, our women scientists. This tremendous participation of youth and women is a major glorious dimension in ISRO’s success. On behalf of our countrymen, I heartily congratulate the scientists at ISRO. Adhering consistently to the objective of bringing Space Science to the common man, for the service of the nation, they are creating one record after another. One runs short of words in complimenting and congratulating our scientists, their entire team.
Shobha Ji has asked one more question and that pertains to the security of India. It is about India having acquired a great capability. This important matter has not been discussed much, but it has drawn Shobha Ji’s attention. In the field of defence also, India has successfully test fired the Ballistic Interceptor Missile. During its trial, this missile, based on interceptor technology, destroyed an enemy missile at an altitude of about 100 km above the surface of the earth and thus marked its success. This is a significant, cutting edge competency in the arena of security. And you will be happy to know that hardly four or five countries in the world possess this capability. India’s scientists have demonstrated this prowess. Its core strength lies in the fact that if, even from a distance of 2000 km, a missile is launched to attack India, our missile can pre-emptively destroy it in the space itself.
When we witness new technology, or a new scientific feat, we are left overwhelmed with joy. Inquisitiveness has played a significant role in the journey of progression of human life and development. And those gifted with extra-ordinary intelligence do not let inquisitiveness to remain just that; they begin further questioning it, look around for newer queries, and try to create new realms in the spirit of enquiry. This incessant spirit of enquiry leads to new inventions. They do not rest till they obtain an answer. If we try to take a bird’s eye view of thousands of years of the onward march of human life and progress, we can easily say that this great journey has no point of culmination. A full-stop is impossible. Attempting to know the universe, the laws of Nature, the inner recesses of the human mind is an unending process. This is what begets new Science, new technology. And every technology, every new form of Science gives birth to a new era.
My dear young friends, while we refer to Science and the sheer perseverance of scientists, I have many a time said in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, that the attraction of Science for our young generation should increase. The country needs more and more scientists. Today’s scientist becomes a potent catalyst for enduring change in the lives of our future generations.
Mahatma Gandhi used to say, “No Science has dropped from the skies in a perfect form. All Sciences develop and are built up through experience”.
Revered Bapu had also remarked, “I have nothing but praise for the zeal, industry and sacrifice that have animated the modern scientists in the pursuit after truth”.
When Science is harnessed keeping in minds the needs of common folk, when ways and means to naturally use those principles for people’s requirements are devised, when appropriate mediums and technologies are deliberated upon, it paves the way for it to be considered the most valuable contribution for general humanity. Recently, during the 14th Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas, Niti Aayog and India’s Foreign Ministry had organized a unique competition. Socially useful innovations had been invited. These innovations were identified and showcased, and people were being informed about them, along with touching upon such issues as harnessing them for the use by the common people and their mass production and commercial utilization. I saw the volume of remarkable work done in that area. To give you an example, I came across an innovation for our poor fishermen brethren. It is a simple mobile App. But it is so powerful that when a fisherman goes to sea for fishing, this App is able to provide guidance for direction to locate the most productive fishing zones and also provide multifarious types of information such as the direction and speed of the wind, the height of waves and so on. This whole array of information is available on this mobile App which can be utilised by our fishermen brethren for moving to those areas with maximum fish presence in a very short time and thus earning their livelihood.
There are times when a problem portrays the importance of Science for finding its solution. In 2005, there was a very heavy downpour in Mumbai, which resulted in flooding, and even high tides in the sea, leading to terrible hardships. Whenever a natural calamity strikes, it is the underprivileged, who are the first in bearing its brunt. In that situation, two persons worked in right earnest and developed a dwelling structure that saves the house and its occupants, mitigates the water-logging and can prevent water borne diseases also. There were a large number of such innovations.
What I’m trying to infer is that in society, in the country, there are many who take on such roles. And our society is also increasingly turning out to be technology driven. Systems are getting technology driven. In a way, technology is becoming an inseparable part of our lives. In the recent days, one can see a lot of emphasis being laid on Digi-Dhan. Gradually, people are shedding their hard currency mindset and moving towards digital currency. Digital transactions in India are witnessing a very rapid surge. The young generation, in particular, is getting habituated to digital payments through its mobile handsets. I believe this to be a good portent. In recent times, Lucky Graahak Yojana and Digi-Dhan Vyapari Yojana have received overwhelming support. For about two months now, everyday fifteen thousand people have been winning a prize of a thousand rupees each. And through these two schemes, the process to make digital payment a mass movement has been initiated; it has received a rousing welcome in the entire country. It is a delight to learn that till now, under the Digi-Dhan Yojana, ten lakh people have been rewarded, over fifty thousand traders have won prizes and an amount of almost over a hundred & fifty crores rupees has been earned as prize money by people who have promoted and carried forward this great campaign. Under this scheme, there are more than a hundred customers who have received prizes of one lakh rupees each. There are more than four thousand traders who have got prizes of fifty thousand rupees each. Be they farmers, traders, small entrepreneurs, professionals, housewives, students – all are enthusiastically participating and also getting benefits from it. When I wanted to know the analysis, as to whether it’s only the young people who come forward or there are elders persons too, I was heartened to learn that among the recipients, there were 15 year old young persons, as well as elderly people aged 65-70.
Shriman Santosh Ji from Mysore, expressing joy, has written on the NarendraModiApp that under the Lucky Grahak Yojana, he received a reward of a thousand rupees. But I feel I must share with you what he has written most prominently. He says that when he received this reward, it struck him that a poor old woman had lost all her belongings because of a fire that broke out in her house. He felt she had more a rightful claim on the reward he had got and gave away the thousand rupees to her. And he derived a lot of Santosh, that is, satisfaction through his deed. Santosh Ji, your name and your deed – both are sources of SANTOSH, satisfaction for all of us. You have done something that is exemplary and inspiring.
A 22-year old cab driver brother Sabir from Delhi adopted the digital mode in his transactions after demonetisation and went on to win a prize of one lakh rupees under the ‘Lucky Grahak Yojana’ of the Government. Though he continues to be a driver, in a way, he has now become an ambassador for this scheme. He keeps imparting knowledge about digital usage to his passengers all the time. He is extremely enthusiastic and motivates others also to go digital.
One young post-graduate student Pooja Nemade from Maharashtra keeps sharing her experience with friends about how her family members are using RuPay Card and e-wallet facilities and deriving enjoyment out of it and also as to how important the prize of rupees one lakh is for her. She has taken up this in a mission mode and is bringing others into its fold.
I urge my countrymen, especially the youth of our country and those who have won prizes under ‘Lucky Grahak Yojana’ or ‘Digi-Dhan Vyapar Yojana’ to become ambassadors of these schemes on their own. Lead this movement. Take it further as it has a very major and prominent role in the fight against corruption and black money. To me, each and every individual involved in this mission constitute a new anti-corruption cadre in the country. In a way you are a soldier in the cause of cleanliness and purity. You know that this scheme will complete its 100 days on 14th April, the birth anniversary of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar, a truly memorable day. There is going to be a very big draw of prizes worth crores of rupees on 14th April. There are still about 40-45 days left for that. Can you do one thing in the memory of Babasaheb Ambedkar? We have recently celebrated 125th birth anniversary of Baba Saheb Ambedkar. Remembering him, you teach at least 125 persons about downloading the BHIM App. Also teach them about the procedure of making transactions through this App; teach this specially to small traders in your neighbourhood. Give special importance to Baba Saheb Ambedkar’s birth anniversary this time and the BHIM App. For this, I would like to say that we have to strengthen the foundation laid by Dr. Baba Saheb. We have to go from door to door associating everybody in order to place the BHIM App in 125 crore hands. Since its beginning about two-three months ago, this movement has had a clear impact and has been a very big success in many townships, villages and cities.
My dear countrymen, agriculture makes a very major contribution to the fundamentals of our country’s economy. Economic prowess of villages imparts momentum to the nation’s economic progress. I wish to share a very happy news with you today. Our farmer brothers and sisters have toiled hard to fill our granaries. The hard work of the farmers has resulted in a record production of food grains. All signals indicate that our farmers have broken all previous records. There has been such bountiful crop this time in the fields of our farmers that every day has appeared to be a celebration of Pongal and Baisakhi. More than two thousand seven hundred lakh tonnes of food grains have been produced in the country this year. This is 8 percent more than the last record set up by our farmers. Thus, it is an unprecedented achievement in itself. I want to specially thank the farmers of the country. I also want to thank our farmers for keeping the poor in mind and adopting cultivation of various pulse crops also besides the traditional crops because pulses are the biggest source of protein for poor people. I am happy that the farmers of my country heeded the needs of our poor people and cultivated various pulse crops on about 290 lakh hectare land. This is not merely the production of pulses but a yeoman service rendered by the farmers to the poor of my country. My farmer brothers and sisters deserve special gratitude for the way they whole-heartedly accepted my request, my prayer and put in their hard labour to get a record production of pulses.
My dear countrymen, the government, society, institutions, organizations, in fact everyone, is making some or the other effort towards greater cleanliness. In a way, everyone is seen working towards the cause of cleanliness in a conscious manner. The government is continuously making efforts in this regard. Recently, an event was organised in Telengana under the leadership of the Secretary of our Ministry of Water and Sanitation of the Government of India, in which senior officers from 23 state governments participated. And, this was not confined to having just a closed door seminar, but the importance of cleanliness was practically demonstrated at Warangal in Telangana. Toilet pit emptying exercise was carried out in Hyderabad on 17th and 18th February. Toilet pits in six houses were emptied and cleaned and the officers personally demonstrated that the used up pits of twin pit toilet can be emptied and then re-used. They also displayed as to how convenient these new technique toilets are and there is absolutely no inconvenience or hesitation in emptying or cleaning these toilets and even the psychological barrier does not come in the way at all. And, we can ourselves clean these toilet pits just as we do other general cleaning. And, this exercise showed results, media in the country gave it wide publicity and highlighted its importance. And it is quite natural also because when people see an IAS officer cleaning a toilet pit himself, the fact is naturally noticed by the country. And we consider the waste taken out from a toilet pit as sheer useless garbage but if considered from the angle of its use as a fertiliser, this, in a way, is black gold. We can clearly see the conversion of waste to wealth. This has been proved too. For a family of six members, the model of one standard Twin Pit Toilet gets filled in about five years. After that the waste can easily be redirected to the other pit. This waste deposited in the pit gets completely decomposed in six to twelve months time. This decomposed waste can be safely handled quite conveniently and can be used as ‘NPK’ which is a very useful fertilizer. Our farmers know ‘NPK’ very well. It contains nutritious elements Nitrogen, Phosphorous and Potassium in abundance and is considered a fertiliser of very good quality in the agriculture sector.
Others must also have experimented with initiatives similar to those undertaken by the Government. Now Doordarshan is broadcasting a special programme of ‘Swachchhta Samachar’, that is ‘Cleanliness News’. Highlighting such things in this programme will be very beneficial. Various government departments regularly observe Cleanliness Fortnight. During the first fortnight of March, Women and Child Development Ministry along with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs will be laying stress on the Cleanliness Campaign. And two other ministries, the Ministry of Shipping and the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation will take the Cleanliness Campaign forward during the last two weeks of March.
We know that whenever an Indian achieves something notable, the whole country feels a new energy and the self-confidence gets a boost. We all hailed the commendable performance by our Divyang Players at Rio Paralympics. India defeated Pakistan in the final of the Blind T-20 World Cup held earlier this month to become World Champions for the second consecutive time and thus raised our national prestige to a new height. I once again congratulate all players of our team. The country is really proud of these Divyang friends for their achievement. I always believe that Divyang brothers and sisters are capable, strongly determined, courageous and possess tremendous resolve. We get to learn something each moment from them.
Be it the field of sports or space science, the women of our country lag behind none. They are moving ahead shoulder to shoulder and are bringing glory to the nation with their commendable achievements. Our women players won a silver medal at the Asian Rugby Sevens Trophy recently. My heartiest congratulations to all these players.
The whole world celebrates 8th March as Women’s Day. In India also more importance needs to be given to our daughters along with increased awareness and sensitivity towards them. ‘Beti Bachao – Beti Padhao’ movement is moving forward with rapid strides. This is no longer just a government programme. It has now become a campaign of societal empathy and public education. During the last two years this programme involved the common man; it has forced people from all corners of the country to think and ponder over this burning issue; and brought about a change in people’s thinking about our traditional beliefs and customs which have been prevalent for many years. It gives us great joy and happiness when we hear the news of festive celebration on the birth of a daughter. In a way, a positive mindset towards our daughters is leading towards societal acceptance. I have heard that in Cuddalore district of Tamil Nadu, child marriage has been banned under a special campaign. About 175 child marriages have been prevented so far. The district administration has opened bank accounts of over 55-60 thousand daughters under ‘Sukanya Samridhi Yojana’. In Kathua district in Jammu & Kashmir, all departments have been connected with ‘Beti Bachao – Beti Padhao Yojana’ under the Convergence Model and in addition to the convening of Gram-Sabhas, all efforts are being made by the district administrations for adoption of orphan baby girls and to ensure their education. In Madhya Pradesh, under the “Har Ghar Dastak” programme a campaign is being run to go to every village and every house to encourage education of daughters. In Rajasthan ‘Apna Bachcha, Apna Vidyalaya’ campaign is being run to readmit those girls into schools, who had dropped out, in order to encourage and motivate them to start studying again. I mean to say that ‘Beti Bachao – Beti Padhao’ movement has also developed in many shapes and forms. This entire movement has become a people’s movement. New imagination and new concepts have been linked and connected with it. This movement has been moulded as per local requirements. This, I believe, is a healthy sign. As we get ready to celebrate ‘Women’s Day’ this 8th March, there is only one sentiment: –
With Strength, with Vitality, the Indian woman comes to the fore
Rightfully deserves equality – neither less, nor more.
My dear countrymen, all of you get an opportunity to express your views from time to time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. You also connect actively with this programme. I get to know so many things from you. I get to know as to what all is happening on the ground, in our villages and in the hearts and minds of the poor. I am very grateful to you for your contribution. Thank you very much.


30. MARCH 26, 2017
31. APRIL 30, 2017
My dearest countrymen namaskar. Before each episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat, ’suggestions pour in Aakashvani, on NarendraModiApp, come through on MyGov, by the phone and come by the means of recorded messages from every corner of the country and people of every age group, And sometimes when I take the time to view them, for me it becomes an extremely pleasant experience.
One comes across such a wide spectrum of information, one finds that every corner of the country is filled with talented people. Like a selfless seeker, these countless people are consumed by desire to contribute something to the society, on the other hand there are mounds of problems that perhaps even the government does not notice! Maybe the system has also become accustomed in dealing with these problems, and so do have the people become accustomed to them. I have come across the inquisitiveness of children, the ambitions of the youth, and the gist of the experience of elders! Myriad kind of facts emerges. Every time the inputs that come in response to every episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, are analyzed in detail by the government.
What are the kinds of suggestions, what are the kinds of complaints and what are the experiences of the people? It is an inherent human nature to advise others. While travelling in the train or the bus if someone coughs, the next person immediately advises a cure. To offer advice or suggest a solution, are part of our nature. In the beginning, when suggestions came in response to a certain episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ , one could discern words of advice, and you could read them too, so our team always felt that many people might have had this particular habit of proffering advice. But when we analyzed the suggestions minutely, I really became quite emotional.
Most of those who give suggestions or try to reach to me are those who are really doing something in their lives. They are making efforts and are engrossed as per their intellect, capacity, ability and circumstances so that something good must happen. And when these things came to my notice I felt that these suggestions are extraordinary. These are suggestions that have emerged out of a certain squeeze of life’s experiences. Some people also give suggestions thinking that if an idea has the potential to work then more people would listen to it if it is heard on a wider platform and hence many people can benefit. And therefore it is their natural desire that it gets a mention in ‘Mann Ki Baat’
According to me all of these things are extremely positive steps. First of all, I express my gratitude to the Karma yogis and those people who have offered some or the other service to the society and recommend maximum suggestions. And not only this, when I mention something positive, such memories come to recall, it is very much a pleasant experience. In the previous ‘Mann Ki Baat’, some people had suggested to me that food was being wasted; not only had I expressed my concern but mentioned it too. And upon my mention, there were mentions of many innovative ideas to save food from being wasted that are being put into practice employed in many corners of the country on NarendraModiApp and also on MyGov.
I had never even imagined that in our country especially the young generation has been doing this kind of work from a long time. Some social institutions have been involved in this activity for many years was common knowledge, but the youth of my country are engaged in this task, I only came to know later. Many have sent me the videos of their work in this field. There are many places where ‘Roti Banks’ are operating. In the Roti Banks, the leftover rotis are deposited by people, they also deposit the leftover vegetables and the needy can obtain food from these banks. The person who donates rotis feels a sense of satisfaction also, the recipient also does not feel humiliated. These are examples of how work can be achieved with the help of society.
Today is the last day of month of April. 1st May is the foundation day of the states of Gujarat and Maharashtra. On this occasion, many felicitations to the citizens of these two states on my behalf. Both states have made constant strides to scale newer heights of development and have contributed toward the advancement of the country. And both the states had a steady stream of great men whose lives and sterling contributions in every sphere of society is a source of inspiration for us.. In remembrance of these great men, on the foundation day of these two states, we should take the pledge of taking our state, our country, our society, our city, and our family to glorious heights in 2022, when we celebrate 75 years of independence.
Plans should be drawn to achieve that pledge and taken forward with the cooperation of all citizens. I wish the very best to these two states.
There used to be a time when climate change was a subject confined to the domain of the academic world, it used to be the topic for seminars, but today, we experience it in our everyday life and it also astounds us. Nature has also changed the rules of the game. The heat that we used to experience in months of May-June in our country is being felt in March-April this year. So, when I was taking suggestions for ‘Mann Ki Baat’, most of the suggestions offered related to what should be done to beat the heat during summer time. Most of the suggestions or practices to beat summer are not new but are prevalent for a long time, however it is very useful to remember them from time to time.
Shri Prashant Kumar Mishra, Shri T. S. Kartik and many such friends have expressed their concern about birds during the summer. They’ve mentioned that water should be kept in trays and utensils on the balcony and on the terrace. I have seen that small children of the family do this very enthusiastically. Once they understand why they should fill the pots with water they would go and inspect 10 times in a day to ensure there is water in the tray. And also watch if the birds came or not. We think as if it is a game going on , but in actuality, this is a novel way of instilling empathy in the child’s mind. You can also experience for yourself that a little attachment to an animal or a bird makes you feel very happy.
Some time back, Shri Mr. Jagat Bhai from Gujarat, had sent his book, ‘Save the Sparrows’ in which he not only expressed concern about the continuously declining number of sparrows, but also what steps he has taken in a mission mode for the conservation of the sparrow which is very nicely described in that book. In our country, we are traditionally imbued with a sense of symbiotic co-existence with animals, birds and nature yet it is necessary that collective efforts in this regard should be emphasized.
When I was Chief Minister of Gujarat, Syedna Sahib the religious leader of Dawoodi Bohra Community had completed his hundred years. He lived till 103 years. As part of the celebration of his 100th year the Bohra community society had launched a huge campaign to save the sparrow under the aegis of Burhani Foundation. I had the opportunity to inaugurate it. Nearly 52 thousand bird feeders were distributed in every nook and corner of the world. This effort also found a mention in the Guinness book of World Records.
Sometimes we are so busy, that we even forget to offer water to the newspaper boy, the milkman, the vegetable seller, the postman or anybody else who come to our house in peak summer days.
Young friends, I want to have a chat with you too. I am sometimes worried that much of our younger generation prefer leading life in their comfort zones. Parents also raise their children in a very protective manner. True there are other extremes also but most are brought up in this comfort zone syndrome . Now the examinations have ended and you must be done with your plans to enjoy the vacation.
Summer vacations feel good inspite of scorching heat. But as a friend, I want to suggest you certain tips about of how to utilize your vacation. I believe some people will put them to use and they will tell me about that too. Would you like to use this time of vacation gainfully, I offer three suggestions, it will be good if you follow all of the three but then try to do atleast one of the three. See that you gain a new experience. Try to take the opportunity of acquiring a new skill. Try to experience something that you have neither heard before , nor seen, nor thought of and yet there is a curiosity in your mind. You must try new places, new experiences and new skills.
There is huge difference between to sometime to see something on television or reading about it in the book or listening about it from acquaintances and to experiencing the same thing yourself. I will urge you to try to experience and satiate your curiosity on any subject during this vacation. Try a new experiment. The experiment must be positive and a little out of your comfort zone. We all belong to the middle class and happy comfortable families. Friends have you ever thought of travelling in a Second Class railway Compartment without a reservation, and going for atleast a 24 hours ride?
What great experience it will be? How are the lives of your co- passengers, what do they do at the station when they alight from the train? What you cannot learn in a year, you will learn in that crowded train travelling without any reservation for 24 hours! You might not get to sleep and have to travel standing. Try it, just experience it once, I am not asking you to try it again and again, do it once. In the evening, take your football or your volleyball or any other sports item and go to a colony of poor and lesser privileged people. Play with those poor kids, you will experience a new kind of joy, the kind you would have never experienced in your life before-that’s the kind of joy you’ll experience!
Have you ever thought what changes would come in the lives of those kids who live in abject poverty when get the opportunity to play with you. And I believe that if you go there once, your heart will tell you to go back again and again. This experience will teach you a lot. Many volunteer organizations are engaged in this kind of work. You are connected to Google Guru, try searching on it and get associated with any such organization for 15 days or 20 days. Go, explore, go to the jungles. Sometimes there are summer camps, for development of different facets of your personality. You can participate in these camps.
But at the same time, don’t you feel that after you’ve attended such summer camps, you have participated in the courses for development of personality and you reach out to those people who have no such opportunity and teach them what you have learned without taking any money. It is possible that you can teach them. I am also worried that technology evolved to reduce the distance, technology came in to being to end the boundaries. But the end result of this is that six people in the same house are sitting in the same room but they are separated by unimaginable distances! Why? Everyone has become so busy with technology in his or her own way. Collectivity is also a way of life, collectivity is power in itself. Secondly I had mentioned about skill acquisition, don’t you feel that you should learn something new!
Today is the era of competition. You get so submerged in the preparation for the examinations, get so consumed to obtain the best grades, there are coaching classes going on even in vacations and you’re worrying about the next exam! Sometimes you feel scared that our youth have become robot like, living life like a machine.
Friends, dreams of making it big in life is a good thing, it is good to have some purpose in life, and you must achieve your goals. But also self-evaluate whether the human element within yourself is getting frustrated, are we not moving away from our human qualities.
Can’t a little emphasis be given on this aspect in Skill development? Get away from technology, and try to spend some time with yourself. Learn a musical instrument or learn a few sentences of a new language, Tamil, Telugu, Assamese, Bengali, Malayalam, Gujarati, Marathi or Punjabi. This is a country full of diversity and if you look, then there can be someone who can teach us something new is just around the corner. If you don’t know how to swim, then learn swimming, try doing some drawing, even if you do not end up making the best drawing, try to practice putting hand to the paper!
The empathy within you will begin to appear. Sometimes if our heart desires to learn the trade of so called ‘small people’ then let us learn it, why not? You want to learn to drive a car but then do you ever want to learn how to drive an auto-rickshaw? You’re able to ride a bicycle but have you ever tried to operate the three-wheeler cycle or rickshaw which transports people? You see, all these new experiments, these skills are such that they will bring you joy and will remove you from the limitations of life to which you’re tied down!
Do something out of the box, my Friends. This is the only time to make something of your life. And if you think that after appearing in all exams, at a new threshold of your career you will learn some new skill, then you won’t get a chance. At that time you will be tangled into other things and therefore I tell you if you have a passion to learn magic then learn the card tricks! Keep showing the tricks to your friends. Try to know about things about which you have no prior knowledge, it will definitely benefit you. Your inner human potential will awaken and this will provide a great opportunity for development. I can tell you from my experience of going around the world, that the amount we can learn by seeing the world is something we cannot even imagine. New places, new cities, new towns, new villages, new areas. But before leaving for a particular place, preparing for the journey and upon reaching your destination gathering information about it like a seeker of knowledge, understanding about the place and having discussions with the local people, if you make an effort in this manner then the pleasure of visiting the particular place would be something else!
Do try to do it; of course do not travel too much in one go. Go to a destination and spend three to four days there. Then go to the next and spend a like duration there. You will get to learn a lot that way. I wish you share your travel photographs with me, it will be nice. What new did you see ! Where did you travel to ! Make good use of the hash tag Incredible India and share your experiences.
Friends, this time around, the government of India has provided you with a great opportunity. The new generation is more or less freeing itself from the shackles of cash. It does not need cash. It has begun adopting digital currency. I know you do it, but have you ever wondered that you can earn using this very scheme? It is a scheme of the Government of India. You must be downloading the BHIM App and using it. But do refer it to others; make others join you in that.
If the new member does three transactions, performs financial business thrice, you stand to earn ten rupees for that. Ten rupees will be credited to your account from the government. If you involve twenty persons in a day, by evening, you would’ve earned two hundred rupees. The traders can earn, so can students. And this scheme is valid till the 14th of October. It will be your contribution towards making of a digital India. You’ll become a sentinel of New India. The joy of a vacation coupled with income ! Refer and earn.
Generally speaking, in our country there exists an atmosphere of disdain towards the VIP culture. But that it runs so very deep, I just experienced, when the government recently decided that no person in India, whatsoever his status might be, will not move with a red beacon atop his vehicle. In a way it had become a symbol of the VIP culture. Experience tells us that whereas the red beacon used to be fixed atop the vehicle, atop the car, slowly & steadily it permeated into the psyche and got firmly entrenched in the mindset. The red beacon now has gone for good but nobody can say with certainty that the same in the mindset has also disappeared. I have received a very interesting phone call. Though the caller has expressed the same apprehension. One can discern from this phone call that common men detest these tendencies. They feel distanced.
“Namaskar Pradhan Mantri ji, I am Shivaa Choubey calling from Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh. I wish to say something on the government’s ban on red beacons. I read a line in a newspaper, ‘Every Indian is a VIP on the road’. It made me feel very proud. I am glad that today, even my time is equally important. I don’t have to be caught in a traffic jam and I don’t have to stop for anyone as well. I want to thank you from the core of my heart for this decision. And the Swachch Bharat Campaign that you have launched will not only clean our country, it will get rid of the VIP hegemony from our roads. Many thanks for that.”
The exit of the red beacon through a government decision is part of a system. But we have to make efforts to cleanse it out of our minds. If we collectively strive to do it with eternal vigilance , it surely can be flushed out. Our concept of New India precisely is that in place of VIP, more priority should be accorded to EPI. And when I’m saying EPI in place of VIP, the essence of my sentiment is clear – every person is important. Every person has his or her own importance, every person possesses a sagacious aura, Mahaatmya, in a unique manner. Let us warmly accept the importance of a hundred & twenty five crore countrymen, let us respectfully embrace the Mahaatmya, the divine greatness of a hundred & twenty five crore Indians and we’ll garner strength of immense magnitude. We have to do this together.
My dear countrymen, I maintain time & again that we should keep re – visiting the annals of our history, traditions and culture. That lends us energy and inspiration. This year, we the hundred & twenty five crore countrymen are celebrating the thousandth birth anniversary of Saint Ramanujacharya. For one reason or the other, we confine ourselves to celebrating and observing centenaries of events mostly. For other countries of the world, a century may be of immense significance. But India is such an ancient Nation that we are the proud inheritors of thousands and thousands of years of heritage, knowledge and civilized existence and have an opportunity to observe and celebrate a memorial heritage of over thousand years. Just try and imagine it. Even today breaking the shackles Social orthodoxy is so difficult. How would society be a thousand years ago? What kind of a mindset would be prevalent then? Not many would know that Ramanujacharya relentlessly struggled against rampant social evils such as the class divide, the chasm between touchable and untouchables and the caste system. Through his own conduct, he embraced those who were ostracized by society. A thousand years ago, he launched an agitation allowing their entry into temples and succeeded in facilitating the same. We are indeed fortunate that in every era, for eradicating social evils, noble souls, great men were born in this society itself. Now that we are celebrating the 1000th birth anniversary of Ramanujacharya, we should gain inspiration from him in our endeavour to foster social unity, to bolster the adage ‘unity is strength’.
In memory of Saint Ramanujacharya, the government of India is releasing a stamp tomorrow, the 1st of May. I respectfully salute Saint Ramanujacharya and pay tributes to him.
My dear countrymen, tomorrow, that is the 1st of May, carries one more significance. In many parts of the world, it is observed as ‘Labour Day’. And when ‘Labour Day’ is referred to, labour is discussed, labourers are discussed, it is but natural for me to remember Babasaheb Ambedkar. You would be aware that for the facilities and respect that workers have earned, we are grateful to Babasaheb. One can never forget the contribution of Babasaheb towards the welfare of the working class. Today when I refer to Babasaheb, when I talk about Ramanujacharya, I’m also reminded of the great 12th century saint & social reformer from Karnataka Jagat Guru Basaveshwar. Yesterday I got the opportunity to be part of a function. It was the occasion of dedication to the nation of his collection of Vachana Amrit, the elixir of his spoken words. In the 12th century, he had laid down his profound thoughts on labour & workers. He had mentioned in Kannada “Kaay Kave Kailas”… it means, it is just through your perseverance that you can obtain Kailash, the abode of Shiva. This means, it is only endeavour or Karma that leads you to attain Swarga, or heaven. In other words, labour, hard work is Shiva. I repeatedly mention ‘Shrameva Jayate’, and Dignity of Labour. I distinctly remember the words of Shriman Dattopant Thengdi, the founder of Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh, the thinker, who deliberated a lot on the working class. He used to remark, on the one hand, inspired by Maoism, ‘Workers of the world unite’, on the other he would say, workers, come, unite the world. Today when I refer to workers, it is but natural to remember Dattopant Thengdi.
My dear countrymen, a few days from now, we shall celebrate Budha Purnima. Followers of Lord Budha across the world celebrate the festival. The world today is undergoing a plethora of problems such as violence, war, annihilation, the arms race et al. Amidst this atmosphere, the philosophy of Buddha comes across as extremely relevant. And in India, Ashok’s life perfectly epitomizes the transformation from war to enlightenment. I feel fortunate that the occasion of the great festival of Budha Purnima is celebrated as Vesak day by the United Nations. This year it will take place in Sri Lanka. On this holy event I shall get an opportunity to pay tributes to Lord Budha in Sri Lanka. It will be an opportune moment to re-visit his ideals.
My dear countrymen, India has always advanced on the path of progress in the spirit of Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas… inclusive development for all. And when we say Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, it is not limited to the confines of India. It applies to the global context too. And very specially to our neighbouring countries. May our neighbouring countries be with us in our journey, may they develop equally. There are many projects under way. On the 5th of May, India will launch the South Asia Satellite. The capacities of this satellite and the facilities it provides will go a long way in addressing South Asia’s economic and developmental priorities. Natural resources mapping, tele medicine, the field of education, deeper IT connectivity or fostering people to people contact – this satellite will prove to be a boon in the progress of the entire region. It is an important step by India to enhance co-operation with the entire South Asia… it is an invaluable gift. This is an appropriate example of our commitment towards South Asia. I welcome all the South Asian countries who have joined us on the South Asia Satellite in this momentous endeavour…. My best wishes to them.
My dear countrymen, the weather is too hot and inhospitable , take care of your loved ones and take care of yourselves.
Wish you all the best.
Thank you


32. MAY 28, 2017
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. It will perhaps be difficult for us to forget the year’s summer.. But, we are now awaiting the rains. As I am talking to you today , the holy month of Ramzan has already commenced . I convey my hearty greetings to all fellow Indians and everyone across the world, especially the Muslim brethren at the advent of this auspicious month of Ramazan. Prayer, spirituality and charity are accorded the highest priority during Ramzan. We, Indians, are very lucky that our ancestors have created such a tradition that today India and its 1.25 billion people can take pride in the fact that people from all communities and faith are available here.. This is a country where both theists and atheists ; idolaters and those loathing idol-worship co-exist. We have adapted ourselves to myriad kinds of ideologies, different ways of worshipping and all types of traditions and imbibed the art of co-existential living . In the ultimate , any religion, faith, ideology or tradition- give us the message of peace, unity and goodwill. This holy month of Ramzan will definitely be helpful in further strengthening these values of peace, unity and goodwill. I, once again convey my best wishes to all.
Last time around while sharing my thoughts in Mann ki Baat I had mentioned) a new word and had specially exhorted our youth to do something new, to come out of the comfort zone, experience new things; as this is the age when one can experiment and take risks and accept new challenges of life. I am glad that many people have given me feedback. All of them showed enthusiasm by personally speaking out their minds to me. I could not read them all nor could listen to all the messages because there were such a large number of messages.But whatever I could see from a cursory look that while some made efforts to learn music, some tried hands on a new musical instrument, some of them are trying to learn new things by using YouTube, some are trying to learn a new language. Some are learning cooking, some others are learning dance and drama ; Some have written that they have now started to write poems. They are making efforts to know about nature and are learning the art of living and trying to understand the world. I am extremely happy and want to share one of the phone-calls with you.
“I am Diksha Katiyal speaking. I had almost left the habit of reading. Therefore I decided to pick up the habit during vacations. When I started reading about the freedom struggle , it was then I realized that how much struggle was involved in getting India freed, how much sacrifices were given and how so many freedom fighters spent years in prison. I am particularly inspired by Bhagat Singh, who achieved so much at such a young age. Therefore I request you that you tell something to the younger generation today on this topic.”
I am delighted that younger generation is taking interest in knowing about our history, about our freedom fighters and about those who made sacrifices for the country. Countless great men spent their youth in jails. Several youngsters went to the gallows . They suffered despicable miseries and that is how we can now breathe in a free India. We see all those great men who spent their time in jails did a great job of writing and reading. Their writings provided a great strength and inspiration to our Freedom Movement.
Many years ago, I visited Andaman & Nicobar Islands. I went to see the Cellular Jail there. Today is the birth anniversary of Veer Savarkarji. Veer Savarkarji had written a book “Majhi Jannmathep” while in incarceration . He used to write poems on the walls of his prison cell. He was confined to a very small cell. These seekers freedom must have gone through immense torture. I was inspired to visit the Cellular Jail only after reading Savarkarji’s book “Maazi Janmthep”.
A light and sound show is also shown there which is very inspiring. There was hardly any state in India youths from which were not exiled to the dark waters of Andamans and were forced to spend their youth in this Cellular Jail during the freedom movement. included people of every language, every state and every generation had faced tortures during this struggle
Today is the birth anniversary of Veer Savarkarjee. I would definitely want to tell our younger generation that to even perceive what kind of torture and trouble these freedom fighters had suffered to achieve freedom for us one must visit this Cellular Jail. Once we go there We come to know as to why this was called Kaalaa Paani or the dark waters If you get a chance, please pay a visit to this place which is actually a pilgrimage of our freedom struggle.
My dear countrymen, 5th of June is the first Monday of the month. Everything is otherwise normal. Yet, 5th of June is a special day as this is observed as “World Environment Day”. This year the United Nations have chosen the theme ‘Connecting People to Nature’. In other words, we may say “back to basics”. And What’s the meaning of connecting with nature?? In my view, it means getting connected with one’s own self. Connecting with nature means nurturing a better planet. And, who can explain this in a better way than Mahatma Gandhi? Mahatma Gandhi often used to say, “One must care about a world one will not see”. This means that it is our duty to be concerned about the world which we shall not see and to care for that. Nature possesses a special power. You might have also observed that whenever we feel tired and exhausted, splashing a glass of water on our face has a wonderful rejuvenating effect. If you return after a tiring day’s work, just open the windows and doors of the room and take a deep breath of fresh air – this will fill you with fresh energy. Our body is made up of five basic elements and whenever we come in contact with these elements we get fresh energy. All of us have experienced this but we do not register this, we do not connect this in a single thread of sequence.
Now on, kindly make it a point to notice that whenever you come in contact with a natural condition , a new spirit emerges from within you. So, the global campaign of connecting with nature on 5th June should become our individual campaign as well. And we are reaping the benefits of the efforts made by our ancestors to save the environment. And if we shall protect the environment, our future generations will reap the benefits. Vedas, describe the Earth and the Environment as the basic sources of energy. And, Atharva Veda, written thousands of years ago, is the most authentic guiding scripture about nature and environment. In India, it has been said – “Earth is the mother and I am her son”. According to Vedas, the purity within us is because of the Earth. The Earth is our mother and we all are her children. If we recall Lord Buddha, a fact comes to light that his birth, his enlightenment and his Mahaparinirvana, all three happened under a tree. We have many festivals and religious rituals which are based on worshiping nature and affection towards nature is a part of our everyday life. This is true in case of all sections of society whether lettered or unlettered , rural or urban and even tribal communities. But we need to present this in modern language and integrate with modern arguments.
These days , I keep receiving news from our states. Almost in every state, a big plantation campaign gets underway with the onset of monsoon. Millions of trees are planted. School children, social organizations and NGOs also get connected with the campaign. Even State Governments take an initiative. Let us also make our contribution in enhancing this campaign.
My dear countrymen, 21st June has become a well known day world over. The whole world observes this as World Yoga Day. In a very short time, 21st June has got worldwide recognition as World Yoga day and is connecting people. At a time when separatist forces are raising their ugly heads this has been India’s great contribution to the world.. We have successfully connected the whole world through Yoga. Like Yoga connects body, mind, heart and soul: similarly it is connecting the world now. Because of life style, because of the mad race to achieve success and because of increasing responsibilities, leading a stress- free life has become very difficult. It is seen, this situation is coming up even at a comparatively younger age. At a time when People are gobbling up medicines indiscriminately and passing their days, Yoga plays a very vital role in helping people to lead a stress-free life. Yoga is a guarantee of wellness and fitness both. Yoga is not merely an exercise. How to mount on the journey of life with the inter-play of body, mind, thoughts and behavior can be better realized and understood through Yoga. Just two days back, I have written letters to all governments and all leaders of the world about the Yoga Day.
Last year, I made announcements of some Yoga competitions and some awards as well. We shall gradually advance in that direction. I have received one suggestion and I compliment the gentleman who has made this creative suggestion. It is a very interesting suggestion. He has said since this is the Third International Yoga Day I should make an appeal that on this third international Yoga Day, three generations of the family should do yoga together. Grand parents, parents and children should together perform Yoga and also upload their photos. It will be such pleasant blend of Yesterday, today and tomorrow that it will lend a new dimension to Yoga. I express my gratitude for this suggestion and I feel that as our ‘Selfie with Daughter’ campaign had proved to be a very inspiring experience. So will this campaign of posting pictures of three generations together performing yoga will evoke curiosity across the nation as well as across the world. You should certainly send the pictures of three generations doing yoga together to me on Narendra ModiApp or on Mygov. This will be the picture of “yesterday, today and tomorrow” and will be a guarantee of a brighter tomorrow. I invite all of you. We are still left with about three weeks for the International Yoga Day. Start practicing from today itself.
From 1st June, I will post something or the other about Yoga on twitter and continue to do so till 21st June. I will share with you. You too kindly spread the message of Yoga and connect people with it. This, in a way, is a movement on preventive health care. I invite you all to get connected to it. Ever since you entrusted me with the responsibility of being the Pradhan Sewak- the Chief Servant of the people and when for the first time when I got a chance to address from the ramparts of Red Fort on 15th August, I had talked of cleanliness. From then onwards, I get a chance to stay in different parts of the country. And, I have seen that people closely follow as to what Modi does, where does Modi go, what all has Modi done. I received a very interesting phone call and I had also not visualized from this angle. But, I am thankful to him for having seen the campaign in this way. This phone call will also attract your attention.
“Pranam Modi ji, I’m Naina from Mumbai. Modi ji I watch whether on TV or Social Media, wherever you go, one can see people in that city pay special attention to cleanliness. Mumbai or Surat, your clarion call has led people to adopt cleanliness as a mission. Not only the elders but children also have become aware about cleanliness. Many a time we see them telling elders not to litter on the roads. The cleanliness drive that you had begun from the Ghats or Banks of the Ganges in Kashi has now taken the shape of a movement inspired by you.”
You are right, that wherever I go, the government machinery does the cleaning but nowadays cleanliness also turns into a social event. Five, seven or ten days before my visit a large number of cleanliness drives are held. Media also prominently highlights such programmes, A few days ago, I went to Kutch in Gujarat. A big cleanliness drive was conducted there. I also did not see a connect is in this. But, after receiving this phone call, I also started thinking that the point made there was pertinent. You can very well imagine how much pleasure I derive by knowing this fact and also by noticing that the country is also closely monitoring the programme. There cannot be any bigger pleasure for me than to know that my visit has been connected with the cleanliness campaign. Besides usual arrangements to welcome the Prime Minister, cleanliness will also be high on the agenda. This is very pleasing and inspiring for any cleanliness loving person. I congratulate everyone connected with this Cleanliness programme providing strength to it.
Someone gave me a suggestion. This is in a way a humorous suggestion. I do not know whether I would be able to do it or not. Modi ji, when someone asks for your visit , your stay, you should ask as to what would be the standard of cleanliness, if they wish to invite you. How many tonnes of waste would you present to me so that I may accordingly decide the duration of stay. The idea is very good but I will have to think. But, one thing is right that this movement should be encouraged and it would definitely be better if cleaning tonnes of waste are cleaned and and given as presents in place of other gifts. How many people shall we be able to save from ill health. This will be a big service to humanity. One thing I would certainly like to say is that we should always consider these waste as resources and wealth. Do not see it as just garbage. Once we start looking at garbage and waste as a wealth, we shall also find newer, techniques of waste management. Young persons connected with Start-ups will also come forward with newer schemes and also come forward with new equipments.
The Central Government has along with State Governments and with the cooperation of municipal representatives of cities decided to launch a massive and important campaign of waste management. On the occasion of World Environment Day on 5th June, there are going to be litter bins made available to collect solid waste and liquid waste in 4000 towns of the country.
Two types of waste bins will be available, one would be of green colour and the other blue. There are two types of waste generated, is the liquid waste and the other is dry waste. If we follow discipline, then the waste bins that are going to be placed in these 4 thousand towns will collect dry garbage in blue waste bins and liquid garbage in green waste bins. The waste from our kitchens, be it vegetable peels, leftover food, egg shells or leaves are all part of liquid waste and are to be placed in green litter bins. This waste can be utilized in fields, and if you will remember that fields are green then you will remember what to place in the green litter bins. The second type of waste is like old newspapers, cardboard, iron, glass, cloth, plastic, leather, polythene, broken boxes, rubber, metals and other kind of waste are all dry waste or litter which can be recycled by machines but cannot be directly used and has to be placed in the blue waste bin. I’ve a firm belief that we will develop a culture and the new steps that we take towards achieving cleanliness will continue, only then will we achieve the dream of Gandhiji, achieve the kind of cleanliness that he dreamt of, today. I must admit with pride that if a single individual decides it in his heart then a huge Public campaign can be launched . Cleanliness is also one such drive.
A few days ago, you must have heard that the Versova beach in Mumbai, which was infamous for its filth has now transformed into a a clean and beautiful beach. People toiled for about 80-90 weeks, unceasingly and turned Versova beach around by extracting thousand of tonnes of waste materials and today Versova beach is clean and beautiful. This campaign was owned by Versova Residence volunteer or VRV. A gentleman called Afroz Shah started this mission from October, 2015 whole heartedly with all his might, slowly people started joining his bandwagon and turned into a people’s movement. For this outstanding work, United Nations Environment Programme or UNEP awarded ‘Champion of the Earth’ Award to Sh. Afroz Shah, and thus he has become the first Indian to achieve this distinction. I congratulate Sh. Afroz Shah, and felicitate this people’s movement. The manner in which Sh. Afroz Shah gathered the people of the area into a people’s collective and gave it the shape of a People’s movement in itself an inspiring example.
Brothers and Sisters, it is with great happiness that I wish to tell you, that I am given to understand that under the aegis of ‘Swachch Bharat Campaign’, the Riyasi Block in Jammu and Kashmir has become completely free of open defecation. I wish to congratulate the people of Riyasi Block and also the public servants of Riyasi Block. Jammu & Kashmir has presented an excellent example. I congratulate one and all in the state. I have been told that this movement found maximum leadership amidst women. The women of that area took out torch rallies to spread awareness, went from house to house, street to street and inspired the people towards this goal. I felicitate the mothers and sisters of Riyasi from the bottom of my heart. I also congratulate the administrators there for making an excellent beginning by turning one block in the state of Jammu and Kashmir open defecation free.
My dear countrymen, an audit and assessment of the performance of the present government in the last three years is happening all over on newspapers, social media or TV for the last 15 days.. Three years ago you vested the responsibility of ‘Pradhan Sewak’- the Chief Servant of the People upon me. There have been many surveys and several opinion polls. I see this entire process as a very healthy sign. The works done during these years were tested on every touch stone . It was analyzed by every segment of society. And this is a great process in democracy. I firmly believe that governments must be accountable in democracy and the public at large must be provided with report card of works done. I wish to congratulate those who took out time for an in depth analysis of our work, there were some praises some support and sometimes shortcomings were also pointed out, I understand the importance of all these things. I thank those people, who provided critical and important feedback. The mistakes and the shortcomings once highlighted can be rectified. Whether something is good, little less effective or bad, whatever it is, one has to learn from it and move ahead in life putting the learning from it into practice.
Constructive criticism strengthens democracy; for an aware nation, an awakened nation, this churning is very important.
My dear countrymen, I too am an ordinary citizen like you and like any ordinary citizen I too am influenced by good or bad things. Some people take ‘Mann Ki Baat’ as a monologue and some criticize it from a political angle but after a long experience, I now feel, that when I had first started ‘Mann Ki Baat,’ I had not given thought to the fact that ‘Mann Ki Baat’ would make me a member of every family in India. Now I feel as if I’m conversing with my family while sitting at home. And there are many families who have written to me these very feelings. And as I said, as an ordinary citizen, I too get affected emotionally. Two days ago there was a launch of an analytical book on ‘Mann Ki Baat’ at Rashtrapati Bhavan, it was attended by the Hon’ble President, Hon’ble Vice President , Madam Speaker of the Lok sabha and as an ordinary citizen and as an individual this was very inspirational event for me. I’m grateful to the Hon’ble President, Hon’ble Vice President and Madam Speaker that inspite of their such high stature they took out time and they accorded importance to ‘Mann Ki Baat’. In fact it in itself has given a new dimension to ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Some of our friends, while working on this book had discussed it with me also. And some time ago, I was pleasantly surprised when this book was in the news again because Akbar Sahab an artist living in Abu Dhabi, proposed that he wishes to sketch the topics on which various episodes of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ were based, and without taking a single rupee Akbar sahab transformed ‘Mann Ki Baat’ into art as a gesture of his love. I am grateful to Akbar Sahab.
My dear countrymen, when we shall meet next time by then monsoon rains would be lashing every corner of the country, the weather would have changed, examination results would have arrived, the journey of education will begin anew and the rains would bring a hope, pleasant fragrance, a new aroma ! Come let us move ahead while loving nature in such a pleasant atmosphere.
My many felicitations and best wishes to you. Thank you.


33. JUNE 25, 2017
My Dear Countrymen. Namaskar. The weather is changing. It has been extremely hot this year. But it is good that the monsoon is moving ahead on schedule on its natural course. The weather has become pleasant in several parts of the country with abundant showers. As a result of the rains, the cool breeze has brought about some respite from the oppressive heat of past few days. One has seen that no matter how hectic the life is, no matter how tense we are, whether its one’s personal or public life, the arrival of the rains does lift one’s spirits.
The Car festival of Lord Jagannath, the Rath Yatra, is being celebrated in several parts of the country with great piety and fervour. This festival is now also celebrated in some parts of the world. The underprivileged of the country are deeply connected to Lord Jagannath. Those who have studied the life and works of Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar, would have observed that he had wholeheartedly praised the Lord Jagannath temple and its traditions, since, social justice and social equality were inherent to these. Lord Jagannath is the God of the poor. But few would know that in English, there is a word, ‘juggernaut’ which means, a magnificent chariot, that is unstoppable. In the dictionary, the etymology of the word ‘juggernaut’ traces its roots to the chariot of Lord Jagannath. And therefore, we can observe that the world has in its own way accepted the significance of the Car Festival of Lord Jagannath, The Rath Yatra. On the occasion of Lord Jagannath’s Car Festival, I extend my heartiest greetings to all my fellow countrymen, and offer my obeisance to Lord Jagannath.
India’s diversity is its unique characteristic, and India’s diversity is also its strength. The holy month of Ramzan is observed all across, in prayer with piety. And now the festival of Eid is here. On the occasion of Eid-ul-Fitr, my heartiest greetings to one and all. Ramzan is a month of charity, and sharing joy. The more you share joy, the more it multiplies. Let us come together and take inspiration from these holy festivals and share their joyous treasures, and take the nation forward.
In this holy month of Ramzan, I came across a very inspiring incident at Mubarakpur village of Bijnor in Uttar Pradesh. About three and a half thousand families of our Muslim brethren reside in that little village and in a way, form a majority of its population. During this Ramzan the villagers decided to get together and construct toilets. Now, to construct these household toilets, the government gives financial assistance, under which, they were provided a sum of 17 lakh rupees. You will be pleasantly surprised and happy to know that, during this holy month of Ramzan, these Muslim brothers and sisters, returned this money to the government, saying, they would construct these toilets with their own labour and their own money; and that this sum of 17 lakh rupees be used for providing other facilities in the village. I felicitate the residents of Mubarakpur, for transforming the pious occasion of Ramzan into an opportunity for the welfare of society on. Each and everything about them is inspiring. And the most important of it all is that they have freed Mubarakpur of the scourge of open defecation. We know that in our country there are three states that have already been declared Open Defecation Free states, that is, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh and Kerala. Uttarakhand and Haryana have also been declared ODF, this week. I express my gratitude to the administration, government and especially the people of these five states, for achieving this objective.
We know very well, that tremendous hard work is required to achieve anything worthwhile, whether it is in one’s own life or for the society. If we have bad handwriting, and we want to improve it, we have to consciously practice for a long time. Only then will the habit of the body and mind will change. Cleanliness is also similar to this. These bad habits have become a part of our nature. We have become accustomed to them. To free ourselves of these habits we will have to constantly strive and persevere. Everyone’s attention will have to be drawn. We will have to repeatedly remind ourselves of good inspirational incidents. And I’m happy to see that cleanliness is no longer confined to being a government programme. It is getting transformed into a movement by the society and the people. And when government functionaries take this initiative forward with the participation of the masses, it becomes even stronger.
Recently I came across a wonderful incident, which I would like to share with you. This happened in the Vizianagaram District of Andhra Pradesh. The district administration there undertook a huge task with people’s participation. From 6 a.m. on the 10th of March, till 10 am of the 14th of March. A hundred-hour non-stop campaign. And what was the objective? To construct 10,000 household toilets in 71 gram panchayats in those hundred hours. And my Dear Countrymen, you will be happy to learn that the administration and the people together did construct 10,000 toilets in hundred hours successfully. 71 villages became ODF. I congratulate the people in the government, government officials and the citizens of Vizianagaram district on this great accomplishment of achieving this feat through immense hard work and setting a very inspiring example in the process.
These days, people have been regularly sending their suggestions for ‘Mann Ki Baat’, on the NarendraModiApp, on MyGov.in, through letters and Akashvani.
Shri Prakash Tripathi reminiscing about the Emergency, has written, presenting 25thof June as a Dark period in the history of Democracy. Prakash Tripathi ji’s commitment to democracy is praiseworthy. Not only is Democracy a system, but also a ‘sanskar’- a part of our ethos. Eternal Vigilance is the Price of Liberty. One needs to be constantly alert about our Democracy, that is why we must also keep remembering the events that inflicted harm upon our democracy; and at the same time move ahead, carrying forward the virtues of democracy. 1975 – 25th June – it was a dark night that no devotee of democracy can ever forget. No Indian can ever forget. The country had virtually become a prison. The voice of the opposition had been smothered. Several prominent leaders including Jai Prakash Narayan had been jailed. The judicial system too could not escape the sinister shadows of the Emergency. The press was completely muffled. The present-day students of journalism and the champions of democracy have been endeavouring towards raising awareness about that dark period, by constant reminders, and should continue to do so. Atal Bihari Vajpayee ji was also in jail at that time. After one year of Emergency, Atal ji wrote a poem, in which he describes the state of mind during those turbulent times.
The scorching summer month,
The sad winter moonlight,
The sobbing monsoon,
An emptiness pervading within
An entire year has gone by.
The world confined behind bars,
But the soul like a restless bird
The freedom song resonates
From the earth to the sky,
An entire year has gone by.
The eyes are in anticipation
Counting days and moments
The beloved who went away,
Shall return one day,
An entire year has gone by.
The believers of democracy fought a prolonged war, and the great nation that India is, where the spirit of democracy pervades the very being of all its people, the strength of that spirit was demonstrated when the opportunity of elections came. We have to further fortify that legacy.
My dear countrymen, every Indian today, is proud and holds his head high. 21st June 2017 – Yoga has permeated the entire world. From the seashores to the mountains, people welcomed the first rays of the sun, with Yoga. Which Indian wouldn’t be proud of this! It isn’t as if Yoga didn’t exist before, but now the threads of Yoga have bound everyone together, and have become the means to unite the world. Almost all the countries in the world made Yoga Day their own. In China, Yoga was practiced on the Great Wall of China, and on the World Heritage site of Machu Picchu in Peru, at 2400 metres above sea level. In France, yoga was performed in the vicinity of the Eiffel Tower. In Abu Dhabi in UAE, more than 4000 persons participated in mass yoga. In Herat, in Afghanistan, on the India Afghan Friendship Dam, Salma Dam, Yoga added a new aspect to India’s friendship. In a small country like Singapore, programs were organised in 70 places, with a week long campaign. On the occasion of International Day of Yoga, the UN released ten stamps. A ‘Yoga Session with Yoga Masters’ was organised at the UN headquarters. The staff of the UN and diplomats from across the world participated.
Yoga has created a world record again this time also. In Ahmedabad in Gujarat, around 55 thousand people performed Yoga together and created a new world record. I too had the opportunity to participate in the Yoga event held in Lucknow. But I also had the good fortune to practice Yoga in the rain for the first time. Our soldiers practiced yoga in Siachen where temperatures reach minus 20, 25, 40 degrees. Whether it is our armed forces, or the BSF, ITBP, CRPF and CISF, each one of them, apart from their duties has made Yoga a part of their lives. On this Yoga Day, since this was the third International Day of Yoga, I had asked you to share photos of three generations of the family doing yoga together. Some TV channels also took this idea forward. I received a lot of photographs out of which, selected photographs are compiled and uploaded on the NarendraModiApp. One significant outcome of the way the yoga is being talked about all around the world is the portent that today’s health conscious society is now taking steps from fitness to wellness, and they have realised that fitness is, of course, important, but for true wellness, yoga is the best way.
Sound bite.
“Respected Prime Minister Sir, I am Dr. Anil Sonara speaking from Ahmedabad, Gujarat. Sir, I have a question. Recently in Kerala, we heard you speak about replacing bouquets that we give as gifts, with good books as mementos. You had started this practice while you were in office in Gujarat, Sir, but in the recent days we have not been seeing much of this. So, can we do something about it? Is there nothing we can do to have this implemented throughout the country, Sir?”
Recently, I had the opportunity to go to one of my favorite events. A very good programme is being run in Kerala for the past few years, by the P.N. Panicker Foundation, which encourages people to cultivate the habit of reading books and to enhance their awareness towards this, by organising celebrations such as ‘Reading Day’, and ‘Reading Month’. I had the opportunity to go for the inaugural function, where I was told that instead of bouquets, they gift books. I liked it. Thus I was also reminded of what had slipped my mind. Because when I was in Gujarat, I had set this tradition of welcoming, by not giving bouquets, but books or handkerchiefs instead. And that too, a ‘Khadi’ handkerchief, so that it promotes ‘Khadi’. Till the time I was in Gujarat, this habit had been ingrained in us, but after coming here, I had lost that habit. When I went to Kerala, it was rekindled. I have already begun to issue instructions in the government. Here too we can gradually nurture this habit. And the life span of a bouquet is very short. You receive it in your hand for a moment and then abandon it. But when you present a book, it becomes a part of the household, a part of the family. One can also use a ‘Khadi’ handkerchief to welcome people, and be a support to the innumerable underprivileged. The expenses are reduced as well, and the gift is well utilized too. I say this, thinking of the historical value of such gifts. During my past UK visit, in London, the Queen of Britain, Queen Elizabeth had invited me to dine with her. The atmosphere was imbued with maternal warmth, and I was served with great affection. Afterwards when she showed me a small thread-spun khadi handkerchief, her eyes lit up. With great respect and in an emotion filled voice, she said, that Mahatma Gandhi had sent this handkerchief to her as a wedding gift. So many years have passed and yet, Queen Elizabeth has treasured the handkerchief gifted by Mahatma Gandhi. And she was happy to show it to me, when I went there. As I gazed at it, the Queen encouraged me to touch it. A small gift by Mahatma Gandhi, has become a part of her life and a part of history. I know that these habits do not change overnight, and when we talk about it, we invite criticism. Despite that, one should keep talking about it, and keep making the effort. Now, I cannot say that if I go somewhere and somebody brings a bouquet I will refuse it. No, I won’t do that, but we will talk about it even though there is criticism, and then gradually, the change will happen.
My dear countrymen, as Prime Minister, there are numerous tasks to be handled. I have to remain deeply absorbed in files, but for my own self, I have developed a habit of reading daily, at least a few of the letters I receive and because of that I get a chance to connect with the common man. I get a variety of letters, written by all sorts of people. Recently, I had the opportunity to read a letter, which I feel, I should share with you. From the far south, in Madurai, Tamil Nadu, Arulmozhi Sarvanan, a housewife, sent me a letter. And what was in that letter? She wrote, that she thought about engaging in some economic activity keeping in mind her responsibilities such as children’s education, to lend some financial assistance to her family. She got some money from the bank, under the ‘Mudra’ Scheme and commenced working towards procuring some items from the market for sale. Then she came to know of the ‘Government E-Marketplace’ system initiated by the government. She tried to find out the details, and asked people about it. And then she registered herself for the scheme. Here I want to tell my countrymen, that if you get the opportunity, you should also visit, the E-G-E-M, E-GEM website on the Internet. This is a great new system. Whoever wants to supply any item to the government, small things such as electric bulbs, dustbins, brooms, chairs and tables, they can register themselves. They can mention the quality of the goods, the rate at which they sell, and it is compulsory for the government departments to visit the site and see whether the supplier can supply the goods at reasonable prices without compromising on the quality. And then the orders can be placed. That is how the middlemen can be removed from the system. The entire process becomes transparent. There is no interface. Everything is done through technology. So, when people register in E-GEM, all the government departments become aware of them. As there are no middlemen, the goods are available at very reasonable rates. Now whatever goods Arulmozhi Madam could supply, she got all those registered on this government website. And the best part is, what she has written in this letter is very interesting. She has written that she got the money from the ‘Mudra’ Scheme and started her business, then she registered the inventory of all her products on the E-GEM website, and then she got an order from the Prime Minister’s Office. It was news to me also, I wondered what the PMO would have ordered. She wrote that the PMO had ordered two thermoses, and she was paid Rupees 1600/-. This is empowerment. This is an opportunity for encouraging entrepreneurship. Had Arulmozhi not written to me I wouldn’t have realised that because of E-GEM, a housewife living far away and running a small business can have the items on her inventory purchased directly by the Prime Minister’s Office. This is the nation’s strength. This has transparency, this has empowerment, this has entrepreneurship too. Government E-Marketplace – GEM. I would certainly like that whoever wishes to sell their products or business items to the government, should increasingly get connected with this website. I believe that this is an excellent example of Minimum Government and Maximum Governance, and it’s objective is Minimum Price and Maximum Ease, Efficiency and Transparency.
My dear countrymen, on the one hand, we take pride in Yoga, on the other we can also take pride in our achievements in space science. And this is the unique attribute of India, that whereas we have our feet firmly on the ground with Yoga, we have our dreams to soar beyond horizons to far away skies. Recently, India has had many achievements in sports, as well as science. Today, India’s flag is flying high not only on earth but also in space. Just two days ago, ISRO launched 30 Nano satellites with the ‘Cartosat-2 Series Satellite.’ And besides India, these satellites are of France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Britain and America, nearly 14 such countries. And with India’s Nano Satellite Mission, we will get a lot of help in the field of agriculture, farming, and dealing with natural disasters. We are all aware that a few days ago, ISRO has successfully launched the GSAT-19. And of all the satellites launched by India, this was the heaviest satellite. The newspapers of our country have compared it with elephantine weights. You can well imagine the magnitude of the achievement of our scientists in space. On the 19th of June, our Mars Mission completed one thousand days. You may be aware that when we had successfully created a place for the Mars Mission in orbit, this entire mission was planned for a duration of 6 months. It had a life expectancy of 6 months. But I’m happy that the strength of the endeavours of our scientists has been such that not only has this crossed six months; even after a thousand days, our Mangalyaan Mission is at work, sending images, providing information, collating scientific data, way beyond its expected duration and life expectancy. The completion of one thousand days, is an important milestone in our scientific journey, our space odyssey.
These days we see that our youth are getting increasingly inclined to the field of sports. It is becoming evident that along with studies, our new generations can see a future in sports as well. And our sportspersons, through their prowess, skills and accomplishments win laurels for the country as well. Recently India’s Badminton player, Kidambi Shrikant has brought glory to the nation by winning Indonesia Open. I extend my heartiest congratulations to him and his coach for this victory. I had the opportunity, a few days ago to be associated with the inaugural function of the Synthetic Track of the renowned athlete, P.T. Usha’s Usha School of Athletics. The more we promote sports, the more we see the spirit of sportsmanship. Sports play an important role in personality development also. There is a great significance of sports in overall personality development. There is no dearth of talent in our country. If the children in our family are interested in sports, they should be given opportunities. They should not be forced off the playing fields to be locked in rooms with books. They should study as well, if they can do well in studies, they should certainly do so, but if they have the potential and the inclination to do well in sports, that should be encouraged and supported by the school, college, family and all the people around them. Each one should nurture dreams for the next Olympics.
My dear countrymen, let me mention once again, that this Season of Rains, with its abundance of festivals and festivities, brings with it a unique new feeling of the times. I extend my heartiest greetings to you all, until the next episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, when I shall share my thoughts with you once again. Namaskar.




34. JULY 30, 2017
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. We human beings have a natural inclination to be enchanted by the delights of the rainy season. Animals, birds, flora – nature in its entirety, is filled with the joys of the season. But sometimes, when the rain unleashes full force of its fury, we come to realise the extent of the destructive might of water. Mother Nature gives us life and nurtures us, but at times natural catastrophes such as floods and earthquakes wreak havoc on a massive scale. Climate change, altered weather cycles, and transformations in the environment, are also having a big negative impact.
Recently, in certain parts of India, particularly, Assam, North-East, Gujarat, Rajasthan and some areas of Bengal, have had to bear the brunt of natural disasters, caused by excessive rains. Flood affected areas are being closely monitored. Relief efforts have been undertaken on an extensive cale. Wherever possible, my colleagues in the Council of Ministers are also personally visiting affected areas. The state governments too are making maximum possible efforts on their part to provide relief to the flood affected people. Social organisations, cultural organizations and common citizens charged with the spirit of service are also making their utmost efforts to help the affected people in this situation. The Government of India, Army personnel, Air Force personnel, NDRF personnel, Paramilitary forces – everybody does his or her best in providing succour to the disaster stricken people.
Life goes completely topsy-turvy as a result of the floods. Crops, livestock, infrastructure, roads, electricity, communication links – everything gets affected. In particular, our Farmer brethren have to bear a lot of losses because of the damage to their crops and fields. Therefore, we have formulated a scheme for the insurance companies, especially crop insurance companies, to make them more proactive, to ensure quick settlements of claims for farmers.
A 24×7 control room helpline number 1078 is functioning continuously to deal with the flood situation. People are also voicing their difficulties. Before the monsoons, the entire government machinery was brought into a state of preparedness through mock drills undertaken at most of the places. NDRF teams were deployed. Aapada Mitra, or Friends during Disaster were identified at various places and these were then trained in the Do’s and Don’ts; volunteers were enlisted, and a people’s organisation set up to work in this situation. Weather forecasts are available these days and the concerned technology has become so advanced these days, and space science also plays a very big role, that these weather forecasts turn out to be mostly accurate now. We should also gradually make it our nature to set our work patterns according to the weather predictions, which could safeguard us against losses.
Whenever I prepare myself for ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I find that the citizens of our country prepare themselves even more. This time around, there have been innumerable letters and phone calls in regard to GST. People are still expressing their happiness about GST, and are also eager to know more about it. I would like you to hear one such phone call: –
“Namaskar, Pradhan Mantri ji, this is Neetu Garg from Gurgaon. I heard your speech on the Chartered Accountants Day and was deeply impressed. In the same manner, Goods and Services Tax, GST, was launched on this very day last month. Could you please elaborate whether its results after one month are matching the expectations of the Government? I would like to hear your views on this. Thank you.”
It has been one month since GST was implemented and its benefits can be seen already. I feel very happy and satisfied when a poor person writes to say how because of GST prices of various items essential for him have come down, and commodities have become cheaper. When a person from the North-East, someone living in the remote areas, in the hills or forests, writes a letter to communicate that in the beginning, he used to be apprehensive about GST wondering what it was all about, but now that he has begun to understand it, he feels that things have become much easier than before. Doing business has become so much easier. And most important of all, the trust of customers for the traders is increasing.
I have been observing how GST has impacted the transport and logistics sector; how the movement of trucks has increased. The time required to cover distances has come down drastically. Highways have become clutter-free. Pollution levels have come down with the increased speeds of the trucks. Goods are also being transported much faster. This indeed is a convenience, but at the same time it is also bolstering the economic progress. Earlier, because of the multiple tax structures, maximum resources of the transport and logistics sector were expended in maintaining paperwork and that also led to the need for construction of new warehouses in each state.
I call GST, Good and Simple Tax. Indeed, it has produced a big positive effect on our economy in a very short time span. The speed at which the smooth transition has taken place, along with rapid migration and new registrations, has instilled a new sense of confidence in the entire country. And some day, the Pundits of Economics, Pundits of Management and Pundits of Technology, will certainly undertake researches and write about India’s GST experiment as a model for the world. It will become a case study for universities across the world. The implementation and furtherance of such a phenomenal change on such a monumental scale, with the involvement of so many tens of millions of people in such a vast country, is in itself a pinnacle of success. The world will definitely make a study of it. And this implementation has had all the states participating in it and sharing the responsibility. All decisions have been taken unanimously by the states and the Centre together. And as a result, one overriding priority for every government has been to ensure that there is no burden on the plate of the poor on account of GST.
And using the GST App all information is available on your mobile phone as to how much the price of an item was earlier and how much will it be now in the new situation. The lofty dream of One Nation – One Tax has finally been fulfilled. In the matter of GST I have seen how everyone, right from the Government functionaries at the Tehsil level to the officers in the top echelons of Government of India have toiled tirelessly with great dedication. The manner in which the friendly environment was created between the Government and traders, between the government and consumers, played a very significant role in enhancing mutual trust.
I extend my heartiest felicitations to each and every ministry, every department and all employees of the Central and State governments involved with this process. GST is a fine example of the collective strength of the people of India. This is a historic achievement. And this is not just a tax reform; it is a new economic order that will strengthen a new culture of honesty. In a way, it is also a campaign for social reformation. I would like to once again express my deep gratitude to the millions of my countrymen who have contributed to the successful achievement of this great feat with such felicity.
My dear countrymen, the month of August is the month of Revolution. We have been hearing this as a natural fact right from our childhood and the reason is, the Non-Cooperation Movement was launched on the 1st of August 1920; the Quit India Movement, which is also known as ‘Agast Kranti’ began on the 9th of August 1942; and on 15thAugust 1947 India became independent. In a way, there are many events in the month of August that are closely associated with the history of our freedom movement. This year, we are going to observe the 75th Anniversary of the Quit India Movement. But very few people know the fact that the slogan, ‘Quit India’ was coined by Dr. Yusuf Meher Ali. Our young generation must know what had happened on the 9th of August 1942.
From 1857 to 1942, the people of India, with their ardent desire for freedom, came together, fought together, and suffered hardships; these pages of history are an inspiration to us for building a glorious India. The heroes of our freedom struggle with their single-minded devotion did a ‘Tapasya’, endured hardships, made great sacrifices and even laid down their lives; what greater inspiration could there be! The ‘Quit India Movement’ was an important milestone in the Indian Freedom Movement. It was this movement that had made the entire nation determined to attain freedom from the British Rule. This was the time when the people of India, in every part of the country – be it a village or city, the educated or illiterate, the rich or poor, everyone came together shoulder to shoulder and became a part of the ‘Quit India Movement.’ People’s anger was at its peak. Millions of Indians responded to Mahatma Gandhi’s clarion call and the mantra of ‘Do or Die’; they flung themselves into the struggle. Millions of the youth of the country renounced their studies, gave up their books. They set out on the march to the sound of the bugle for freedom. Mahatma Gandhi gave a call for the ‘Quit India Movement’ on 9th August, but each and every prominent leader had been imprisoned by the British Government, and it was during this time that the second generation of leadership comprising great men like Dr. Lohia, Jaiprakash Narain played a leading and pivotal role.
In the ‘Non-Cooperation Movement’ of 1920 and the ‘Quit India Movement’ of 1942, two different personas of Mahatma Gandhi can be seen. The whole scenario of the ‘Quit India Movement’ was different and in 1942 things rose to such a point, there was such a heightened sense of intensity, that a Mahapurush like Mahatma Gandhi gave the mantra of “Do or Die.” The reason for this entire success was the people’s support, people’s resolve, and people’s struggle. The entire country had come together as one to fight for the cause. And I sometimes think that if we link the pages of history, it is seen that the First War of Independence took place in 1857. The freedom struggle which began in 1857, continued to be manifested in one or the other corner of the country till 1942. This long time period ignited the intense longing for freedom in the hearts of the people. Each one became committed to do something. The determination did not diminish with each passing generation. New people kept coming forward each time in place of those who departed and the country kept on every moment endeavouring tirelessly to uproot the British Rule. This perseverance, this struggle from 1857 to 1942 created a situation which reached its climax in 1942; the clarion call of ‘Quit India’ was such that within five years, in 1947 the British were compelled to leave India. 1857 to 1942 – the yearning for freedom had reached the grassroots, had reached everybody. And 1942 to 1947 – these decisive five years became integral for the masses to successfully attain through resolve, freedom for the country. These five years were indeed decisive.
I would now like to connect you with its mathematical manifestation. We became free in 1947. This is 2017. It has been almost 70 years. Governments have come and gone. Systems have been made, changed, nurtured, and expanded. Everyone has tried to rid the country of its problems in one’s own way. There have been efforts towards increasing employment, poverty alleviation, and development. These efforts were also driven with hard work in their different ways. There have been successes. Expectations have also risen. The way, the years from 1942 to 1947 were the decisive years for attainment through resolve. I can see that 2017 to 2022 presents itself as a new time segment of five years for attainment through resolve. We should celebrate 15th August 2017 as the Sankalp Parva or the Day of Resolve, and in 2022 marking 75 years of Freedom, we will certainly transform that resolve into ‘Siddhi’ or attainment.
If 1.25 billion Indians, commemorate Agast Kranti Day of 9th August, and each person resolves on 15th August, that he or she will do for the country, this much as an individual, as a citizen, this much as a family, this much as a society, this much as a village, this much as a city, this much as a government department, and this much as the government; let there be millions and millions of resolves; let there be strivings for the realisation of these millions and millions of resolves.
Just as the five years from 1942 to 1947 were decisive for the country’s Independence, these five years from 2017 to 2022 can and must play a decisive role for the future of India. Five years from now, we will celebrate 75 years of India’s Independence. Therefore, we must take a firm resolve today. We must make 2017 our Year of Resolve. In this month of August, we have to come together and resolve: Filth – Quit India; Poverty – Quit India; Corruption – Quit India; Terrorism – Quit India; Casteism – Quit India; Communalism – Quit India!
The need for today is not ‘Do or Die’, instead it is to resolve, to come together, persevere, and work relentlessly with our utmost strength towards the making of a new India. Let us live by and strive for this resolve. Come let’s launch a mega campaign Sankalp se Siddhi – Attainment through Resolve, from the 9th of this August. Every Indian, social organisations, Local Self-Government Institutions, schools, colleges, various organizations – all should take one resolve or the other for a New India. A resolve that we will positively fulfil in the next five years. Youth organisations, student organisations, NGOs, etc. can organise group discussions, to bring forth new ideas. Where do we want to reach as a nation? What can be my contribution for this as an individual? Let us come together and make this a Festival of Resolve.
I would particularly like to call upon the online world, since wherever we may be, we are almost always online; so I would like to invite the online community and specially my young friends to come forward and contribute innovatively for building of the New India. They can use technology – videos, posts, blogs, scripts, novel ideas – to put forward all these. Transform this campaign into a peoples’ movement. A Quit India Quiz is also being launched for my young friends on NarendraModiApp. This quiz is an attempt to familiarise the youth with India’s glorious history and the heroes of the freedom movement. It is my belief that you will surely publicise and spread awareness about this quiz.
My dear countrymen, on August 15, as the nation’s ‘Pradhan Sewak’, I get an opportunity to communicate with the country from the ramparts of the Red Fort. I am merely an instrument. It is not one single person who makes that address, but it is the collective voice of 1.25 billion of my countrymen that resounds from the Red Fort. I try to give words to their dreams, and I am glad that for the past 3 years, I get suggestions from every corner of the country for August 15, as to what I should speak on the 15th August and which issues should I include in my address on the occasion. This time too, I invite you to share your thoughts either on MyGov or on NarendraModiApp. I read these myself and shall try to express them in whatever time I have with me on 15th August. For the previous three 15th August speeches, one consistent complaint has been that my speeches tend to be a little lengthy. I have planned to keep my speech short this time – not more than 40-45-50 minutes. I have tried to draw these rules for myself, but I don’t know whether I’ll be able to stick to them. But I do intend to try this time to shorten my speech. Let’s see whether I succeed or not.
My countrymen, I would like to say one more thing to you. India’s economy has in itself an element of social economics. And we should never underestimate its value. Our festivals, our celebrations are not merely occasions of joy and merriment. Our festivals are in themselves campaigns of social reform too. And each of our festivals are directly linked with the financial conditions of the poorest of the poor. Rakshabandhan, Janmashtami, Ganesh Utsav, Chauth Chandra, Anant Chaturdashi, Durga Pooja, Diwali – these will be observed one after the other. And this is also the time when the poor get an opportunity to earn an income and of course this adds a spontaneous joy to the festivities.
Festivals lend a sweetness to our relationships, bring a warmth of togetherness in the family and foster brotherhood in society. They connect the individual with society. It is a natural journey from the self to the collective. And the ‘I’ gets an opportunity to transform into a ‘We’. As far as the economy is concerned, hundreds of families start making Rakhis in small household units, many months before the festival of Rakhi. A variety of Rakhis are made in a whole range of materials, from ‘khadi’ to silken threads. People prefer homemade Rakhis these days. Rakhi makers and their sellers, sweets shops vendors – the professions of hundreds, thousands flourish on the occasion of a festival. The households of our poor brethren and their families are dependent in a way on these activities. When we light a ‘diya’, an earthen lamp on Deepawali, it is not merely a festival of lights, a festival that illuminates the entire house; it is directly connected with those poor families who make small ‘diyas’ or earthen lamps. Today as I speak about festivals and how they are linked to the economy of the poor, I want to touch upon the subject of environment as well.
I have observed and sometimes think that the citizens of our country are more aware and active than me. For the last one month, environmentally conscious citizens have constantly written letters to me. And they have requested that I talk about eco-friendly Ganesha idols, well in time for people to plan for clay Ganesha idols during the festival of Ganesh Chaturthi. Firstly, I am most grateful to such conscientious citizens. They have urged me to speak on this subject well before the festival of Ganesh Chaturthi. This time around, there is a special significance to the observance of community Ganesh festival as a public celebration.
Lokmanya Tilak ji started this great tradition, and this year marks the 125th anniversary of community Ganesh festival. 125 years and 1.25 billion countrymen! Lokmanya Tilak ji started the Sarvjanik Ganeshotsav with the basic aim to inculcate the spirit of unity, enhance awareness in society, and promote the culture of togetherness. So this year we should again, during the Ganesh festival, organise essay competitions, have open discussions and remember the contributions of Lokmanya Tilak. And we must think anew ways to steer Community Ganesh Festivals in consonance with the sentiments of Tilak ji. How we must lend strength to that spirit and at the same time resolve to use eco-friendly clay Ganesha idols, to protect the environment. And this time I have spoken about it well in time. I am sure that all of you will join me. This will surely benefit our poor artisans, and artists, and provide employment to those who make idols. The poor will be able to earn a living and feed themselves. Come, let us link our festivities with the economic welfare of the poor, let the joys of our festivals connect with the households of the underprivileged, bringing monetary happiness to the have-nots. This should be the endeavor of all of us. I extend my best wishes to all my countrymen for the various upcoming festivals and celebrations.
My dear countrymen, we are continually seeing that our daughters are bringing laurels to the country in all the fields – be it education, economic activities, social spheres or in sports – they are scaling new heights. We as a nation take great pride in our daughters. Recently our daughters performed brilliantly in the Women’s Cricket World Cup. This week I had the opportunity to meet our daughters, the members of our Women’s Cricket team. I felt happy talking to them, but I had a feeling that they felt burdened by the fact that they could not win the World Cup. This stress, this tension was evident on their faces also. So while speaking to these daughters, I put forth a different viewpoint before them. I said, “Look, this is the age of the media. So expectations get hyped up to such an extent that if corresponding success is not achieved, these turn into despair and even resentment. We have seen during many such events where if the Indian players fail, the anger of the country is vented towards the players. Some people cross all limits of decency and say and write things that inflict pain and hurt. But it happened for the first time that when our daughters did not succeed in winning the World Cup, the hundred and twenty-five million people took this defeat on their own shoulders, never letting the burden weigh down these daughters of ours. Not only this, they lauded them and showered them with high praise for their brilliant performance. I view this as a healthy and pleasant change and I told these daughters that only they were blessed with such good fortune, and hence they should banish any thought of not having been successful. You may not have won the final match but you have won the hearts of 1.25 billion Indians. Truly our young generation, especially the daughters of our country are doing so much to bring glory to the nation. I once again extend my heartiest congratulations and best wishes to the young generation of our country, especially our daughters.
My dear countrymen, I remind you once again of ‘Agast Kranti’, of 9th August, I remind you once again of 15th August. And I am reminding you once again of 2022, 75 years of India’s Independence. Every countryman should make a resolve, every countryman should prepare a 5-year roadmap to realise that resolve. All of us have to take our nation to newer heights. We must strive tirelessly to do so. Come, let’s march together as we do our bit. The destiny, the future of the country shall be brighter, let us move ahead with this belief. Lots and lots of good wishes to you all. Thank you!


35. AUGUST 27, 2017
36. SEPTEMBER 24, 2017
37. OCTOBER 29, 2017
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. The mega festival of Chatth, celebrated 6 days after Diwali, is one of those festivals which are celebrated in accordance with strict rituals & regimen. In everything associated with it like cuisine or attire, traditional norms are adhered to. The unique festival Chhath Pooja is deeply linked with nature & worshiping nature. Surya & Jal –The Sun & Water are central to the veneration in Chhath, whereas utensils made of bamboo & clay and tubers are an essential part of the Pooja articles. In this mega festival of faith, veneration of the rising sun and worship of the setting sun convey a message that is replete with unparalleled Sanskar. The world respects & venerates those who rise; the Chatth Pooja bestows upon us the sanskaar to respect & revere those whose setting, whose dusk is imminent. The expression of the significance of cleanliness in our lives is intrinsic to this festival. Before the advent of Chatth, people come together to clean up their homes, and along with that cleansing of rivers, lakes, pond banks and pooja locations, that is ghats, with utmost enthusiasm & fervour. Sun worship or Chhath Pooja is a festival of protecting the environment, ushering in wellness and discipline.
Usually, people shy away from borrowing from others. But in Chhath Pooja, it is specially customary to ask for Prasad after the morning Arghya ritual. It is believed that the rationale behind this tradition is that, it destroys his ego that proves to be an impediment in one’s path of progress. It is natural for each one of us to feel proud of this great tradition of India.
My dear countrymen, ‘Mann – Ki – Baat’ has garnered accolades; it has also attracted criticism. But whenever I look at the overall outcome of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, it reinforces my belief, that it is intrinsically, inseparably woven into the warp & weft of our common citizens’ lives, cent per cent. Take the examples of Khadi and handloom. On Gandhi Jayanti I have always advocated the use of handloom and Khadi. What has it led to? You will be glad to know that on the 17th of this month on the day of Dhanteras, the Khadi Gramodyog Bhavan store in Delhi witnessed a record sale of Rupees one crore, twenty lakhs. You too must be feeling happy with a sense of satisfaction at this mega sale in just one Khadi & Handloom store. During Diwali, Khadi gift coupon sales recorded an overwhelming 680 per cent rise. Compared to last year, the total sales of Khadi & Handicrafts have risen almost by 90%. One can clearly see that today, the youth, the elderly, women, in fact every age group is taking to Khadi & handloom.
I can imagine how many weaver families, poor families, and the families working on handlooms must have benefitted from this. Khadi was Khadi foundation earlier and we talked of Khadi fashion but with my recent experience I can say that after Khadi for nation and Khadi for fashion now, it is becoming Khadi for transformation. Khadi and handloom have transformed the lives of the poorest of the poor and are emerging as a powerful means of empowering them. It is playing a very important role for gramodaya.
Shriman Rajan Bhatt has written on NarendramodiApp that he wants to know about my experience of celebrating Diwali with security forces and he also wants to know how the security forces celebrate Diwali. Shriman Tejas Gaikwad has also written on NarendramodiApp whether there could be an arrangement to send our homemade sweets to the security forces. We also remember our brave security forces. We also feel that our homemade sweets must reach our country’s soldiers. All of you must have celebrated Deepawali with traditional fervour. To me, Diwali brought a special experience. Luckily I got another chance to celebrate Deepawali with our courageous and brave heart security personnel. Memories of Diwali celebrations with our security forces in Gurez sector of Jammu & Kashmir will stay long cherished in my heart. On behalf of all our countrymen, I salute every soldier of our security forces who guard the country’s borders with utmost dedication and a spirit of sacrifice, braving all odds. Whenever we get a chance or whenever there is an opportunity we must try to know the experiences of our soldiers and listen to their tales of valour. Many of us may not be aware that the jawans of our security forces play an important role not only on our borders but they play a very vital role in establishing peace the world over. As UN Peacekeepers, they are bringing glory to the nation in the comity of nations. United Nations Day was observed recently all over the world on the 24th of October.
Everybody recalls the efforts and constructive role of the UN in establishing peace throughout the world. And, we are believers in “Vasudhaiv Kutumbakam” which means the whole world is our family. And with this belief, India has been cooperating very actively in various important initiatives taken by the UN. You may be aware that the preface of the Indian Constitution and the preface of the UN Charter; both start with the words ‘We the people’. India has always stressed on the importance of equality for women and the UN Declaration of Human Rights is a living example of this.
In its initial phrase, it was proposed as ‘all men are born free and equal’ which was amended and adopted as ‘all human beings are born free and equal’ with the efforts of the Indian representative Hansa Mehta. It appears to be a minor change but it reflects a vision of a healthy thought. India’s most important contribution under the UN umbrella is its role in UN Peacekeeping Operations. India has always been extending active support to UN Peace Missions.
Many of you may be getting to know this for the first time. More than 18 thousand Indian security personnel have lent their services in UN Peacekeeping Operations. Presently, about seven thousand Indian soldiers are associated with UN Peacekeeping initiatives which is the third highest number of soldiers from any country. Till August 2017, Indian soldiers had lent their services in about 50 of the total of 71 Peacekeeping operations undertaken by the UN the world over. These operations have been carried out in Korea, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Congo, Cyprus, Liberia, Lebanon, Sudan and many other parts of the world. In Congo and Southern Sudan more than twenty thousand patients were treated in hospitals of the Indian army and countless lives were saved.
Indian security forces have not only saved people in various countries but also won their hearts with their people friendly operations. Indian women have played a leading role in peace keeping efforts. Very few people may know that India was the first country which sent a female police unit to Liberia for the United Nations Peace Mission. And see how this initiative from India became a big source of motivation for other countries too. Later, all countries started sending their women police units. You will surely feel proud to know that India’s contribution is not limited to just peacekeeping operations but it is also providing training to peacekeepers from about eighty five countries. The brave peacekeepers from this land of Mahatma Gandhi and Gautam Budha have sent a message of peace and amity around the world. Peacekeeping operation is not an easy task. Jawans from our security forces have to perform duties in difficult and remote areas. They have to live amongst many different people. They need to know and adapt to various situations and different cultures. They have to mould themselves according to the local needs and environment. While remembering our brave UN Peacekeepers today, who can forget the sacrifice of Captain Gurbachan Singh Salaria who laid down his life while fighting in Congo in Africa?
Every Indian feels proud while remembering him. He was the only UN peacekeeper, a brave-heart, who was awarded the Param Veer Chakra. Lieutenant General Prem Chand ji is one among those Indian Peacekeepers who carved a special niche for themselves in Cyprus. In 1989, at the age of 72, he was appointed the Force Commander for an operation in Namibia and he gave his services to ensure the Independence of that country. General Thimaiyya, who had been India’s army chief, lead the UN Peacekeeping force in Cyprus and sacrificed everything for those peace efforts. India has always been giving a message of peace, unity and harmony to the world. We believe that everyone must live in peace and harmony and move ahead to carve a better and peaceful tomorrow.
My dear countrymen, our holy land has given great souls who selflessly served humanity. Sister Nivedita, whom we also know as Bhagini Nivedita, was one such extraordinary person. She was born in Ireland as Margret Elizabeth Noble but Swami Vivekanand gave her the name NIVEDITA. And Nivedita means the one who is fully dedicated. She later proved herself true to her name. Yesterday was the 150th birth anniversary of Sister Nivedita.
She was so impressed by Swami Vivekanand that she renounced her happy- prosperous life and dedicated herself to the service of the poor. Sister Nivedita felt very hurt by the atrocities of the British rule. The Britishers not only made us slaves but they tried to enslave us mentally as well. Constant efforts to belittle our culture and make us feel inferior were on. Bhagini Nivedita ji revived the dignity and pride of Indian culture. She brought the people together by infusing a sense of national-awakening. She travelled to various countries and raised her voice against the mischievous propaganda against Sanatan Dharma and ideology. Renowned nationalist and Tamil poet Subramanya Bharati is well known for his revolutionary poem Pudhumai Penn or New woman and is renowned for his efforts for Women empowerment.
It is said that Bhagini Nivedita was the inspiration. Bhagini Nivedita ji also helped the great scientist Jagdish Chandra Basu. She helped publication of Basu’s research and publicity through her articles and conferences.
This is India’s unique beauty that spirituality and science complement each other in our culture.
Sister Nivedita and Scientist Jagdish Chandra Basu are a powerful testimony to this. In 1899, plague broke out in Calcutta and hundreds of people lost their lives in no time. Sister Nivedita, without caring for her health, started cleaning drains and roads. She was a woman who could live a luxurious life but she dedicatedly worked for the poor. Getting inspiration from her sacrifice, people came forward and joined her.
Through her work, she spread the message of the importance of cleanliness and service to mankind. And, it is inscribed on her grave – “Here reposes Sister Nivedita who gave her all to India”. Undoubtedly, she did so. There cannot be any other befitting tribute to this great soul than every Indian taking a lesson from her life and emulating her.
Thank you for your phone call. First of all, many felicitations to all the children on the occasion of Children’s Day celebrated on the birthday of our first Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru ji. Children are the emerging heroes in the creation of new India. Your concern is correct that the diseases which surfaced in old age, or emerged around the last lap of life – have started to appear in children nowadays. It is indeed surprising today, when we hear that children are suffering from diabetes.
In earlier times, such diseases were known as ‘Raj-Rog’ which means diseases that used to afflict only the rich or those who lived a life of luxury. Such diseases were very rare in young people. But our lifestyle has changed. Today these diseases are known as ‘lifestyle disorders.’ One of the main reasons for being afflicted with such diseases at a young age is the lack of physical activity in our lifestyle and the changes in our eating habits.
Society and the family need to pay attention towards this crisis. If you’ll start paying attention to it, you will see that there is no need to do anything extraordinary. You just need to make small regular changes in order to transform your habits, making them a part of your way of life. I would like the family to consciously try to inculcate in children the habit of playing in open grounds. If possible, we can make the elder family members accompany these children to the playground and play with them.
The children can be made to take the stairs instead of taking the lift. After dinner, the entire family can go for a walk with the children. Yoga for Young India. Yoga will be helpful for especially our young friends, in maintaining a healthy lifestyle and protecting them from lifestyle disorders. The practice of Yoga 30 minutes before school can impart much benefit. It can also be practised at home and the specialty of Yoga is that it is easy, simple and accessible to all. I am saying this because a person of any age can easily practise it. It is simple because it can be easily learned and it is accessible, since it can be done anywhere.
No special tools or fields are needed. There are several studies being conducted on how Yoga is effective in curbing diabetes. These studies are being carried out in AIIMS too and the results that have emerged so far are very encouraging. Do not look at Ayurveda and Yoga as a means of medical treatment only; instead of this we should make them a part of our life.
My dear countrymen, especially my young friends, we have been getting glad tidings from the field of sports. In different games, our athletes have made the country proud. In hockey, India has won the Asia Cup hockey title through its dazzling performance. Our players performed magnificently and on the basis of their sterling efforts, India has become the Asia Cup champion after an interval of ten years. India had earlier won the Asia Cup in Hockey in the years 2003 and 2007. I extend felicitations on behalf of the entire nation to the entire team and support staff.
After hockey, good news for India also came in badminton. Badminton star Kidambi Srikanth has filled every Indian’s heart with pride by clinching the Denmark Open title with his excellent performance. After Indonesia Open and Australia Open, this win has completed the triad of the super series premiere title. I congratulate our young friend, Kidambi Srikanth for this feat and enhancing the prestige of India.
Friends, the FIFA Under-17 World Cup was organized this month. Teams from all over the world came to India and all of them exhibited their skills on the football field. I also got an opportunity to go and watch a match. There was a lot of enthusiasm among the players and the spectators. This world cup was a super event where the whole world was watching you. Such a big spectacle, I was astounded to see the energy, enthusiasm, and zeal of all the young players. The world cup was successfully organized and all the teams performed their best.
Regardless of the fact that India could not win the title, the young players of India won the hearts of everyone. The whole world including India enjoyed this mega festival of sports and this whole tournament was both full of interest and entertainment for football lovers. The signs that the future of football is very bright have started to appear. I extend my congratulations and good wishes to all the players, their colleagues, and all the sports lovers once again.
My dear countrymen, a multitude of people write to me about ‘Swachch Bharat’, I feel that if I have to do justice to their feelings then I will have to do the program ‘Mann Ki Baat’ every day and every day ‘Mann Ki Baat’ will be dedicated solely to the subject of cleanliness. Some listeners send photo graphs of the efforts undertaken by children whereas others mention the role of youth in these efforts. Sometimes there is a story of an innovation to bring about cleanliness or winds of change that get ushered due to an official’s zeal.
A few days ago I received a very detailed report highlighting the story of transformation of Chandrapur Fort in Maharashtra. An NGO called Ecological Protection Organization launched a cleanliness campaign in Chandrapur Fort. In this campaign lasting for two hundred days, people performed the task of cleaning the fort, non-stop, without any fatigue and with team-work. Just think Two-hundred-days of continuous labour! They sent me photographs with a caption- ‘Before and After’! I was overwhelmed on seeing these and whoever will see these photographs, no matter how upset he is on witnessing the filth around him, and wondering how the mission of cleanliness will be fulfilled – then I have to tell such people that you can see for yourself the toil, resolve and determination of the members of the Ecological Protection Organization, in these living pictures.
Just on seeing these pictures, your disappointment will transform into hope. This mammoth effort of bringing about cleanliness is a wonderful example of fostering aesthetics, co-operation and continuum. Forts are symbols of our heritage. And it is the duty of all countrymen to keep our historical heritage safe and clean. I congratulate Ecological Protection Organization, their entire team and the people of Chandrapur.
My dear countrymen, we’ll celebrate Guru Nanak Jayanti on the 4th of November. Guru Nanak Dev ji is not only the first guru of Sikhs; he’s guru to the entire world. He envisioned the welfare of all humanity and considered all castes to be equal. He stressed on women empowerment and respect for women. Guru Nanak Dev ji undertook a 28 thousand kilometre journey on foot and throughout the journey spread the message of true humanity. He entered into a dialogue with people and showed them the path of truth, sacrifice & dedication. He advocated the message of equality in society, not through mere words but through concrete endeavour. He ran a LANGAR which sowed the seeds of the spirit of service amongst fellow beings. Partaking of LANGAR together created a feeling of unity & oneness in people. Guru Nanak Dev ji voiced three messages for a meaningful, fulfilling life- Chant the name of the Almighty, work hard and help the needy. In order to convey his ideals, Guru Nanak Dev ji composed the Gurbani. Come 2019, we are going to celebrate the 550th PRAKASH VARSH of Guru Nanak Dev ji. Come, let us try & advance on the path of his ideals & teachings.
My dear countrymen, we shall celebrate the birth anniversary of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel ji, two days from now, on the 31st of October. All of us know that he was the one who laid the foundation stone of modern, unified India. We can learn a lot from the unparalleled saga of this great son of Mother India. The 31st of October was also the day on which Smt. Indira Gandhi left this world. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel’s speciality was that he not only put forth revolutionary ideas; he was immensely capable of devising practical solutions to the most complicated problems in the way. Translating a thought into reality was his forte’. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel took on the reins of weaving a unified India. He ensured that millions of Indians were brought under the ambit of one nation & one constitution. His decision making ability infused in him the strength to overcome all obstacles. Wherever respectful coercion was needed, he proceeded gently. Wherever the use of force was imperative, he did not hesitate. He set a definite goal and moved forward on its path with grit & determination. It was only he who could achieve this task of uniting India. He conceived a nation where everyone was equal. One ideal of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel will always be inspiring to all of us. He had said “No division of caste or creed should be able to stop us, all are the sons & daughters of India, all of us should love our country and we should carve out our destiny on the foundation of mutual love & harmony.
These lofty ideals of Sardar Sahab are relevant to and inspiring for our vision for a New India, even today. And that is why his birthday is celebrated as National Unity Day. His contribution in giving a unified texture to the nation is without parallel. On the occasion of the birth anniversary of Sardar Sahab, Run for Unity will be organized throughout the country, which will see the participation of children, youth, women, in fact people of all age groups. I urge you to participate in Run for Unity, the festival of mutual harmony.
My dear countrymen, you must’ve returned to your respective routines after the Diwali vacation, with a new resolve, with a new determination. May all your dreams come true, my best wishes to you.
Many many Thanks.


38. DECEMBER 31, 2017
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. This is the last edition of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ this year and it’s a coincidence that this day happens to be the last day of the year of 2017. You and I shared many thoughts and ideas the entire year. Your steady stream of letters to ‘Mann Ki Baat’, your comments, this exchange between minds always infuses new energy in me. A few hours later, the year will change, but this sequence of our conversation will go on, just the way it is. We will renew this exchange of thoughts on newer topics in the year to come, we’ll share new experiences. Heartiest New Year greetings to all of you. Over the last few days, the festival of Christmas was celebrated across the world with gaiety and fervor. People in India too celebrated Christmas with warmth and cheer. The pious occasion of Christmas reminds us of the great teachings of Jesus Christ who laid much emphasis on the spirit of service, ‘Sewa bhaav’. The essence of the spirit of service can be felt in the Bible too.
The Son of Man has come, not to be served
But to serve’
And to give his life, as blessing
To all humankind.
 
This conveys the immense significance attached to the sanctity of service. Be it any religion, caste or creed, tradition or colour in this world; the spirit of service is an invaluable hallmark of the highest human values. In our country we refer to ‘NishKaam Karma’, selfless deeds, meaning a service done without any expectations. It is mentioned in our land ‘Sewa Parmo Dharmah’… service is the noblest way of life, ‘Jeev Seva hi Shiv Seva’… Service to living beings is service to god. Gurudev Ramkrishna Paramhans used to cite, ‘serve living beings as if worshipping the almighty. The inference is that the world over, these are shared, common human values. Come, let us remember great men & their ideals; let us be reminded of the essence of holy occasions; let us infuse a new awakening, a new drive into our great value system. Let us try & live, abiding by them.
My dear countrymen, this year was also the 350th ‘Prakash Parv’ of Guru Gobind Singh ji. The illustrious life of Guru Gobind Singh ji, full of instances of courage & sacrifice is a source of inspiration to all of us. Guru Gobind Singh ji preached the virtues of sublime human values and at the same time, practiced them in his own life in letter & spirit. A guru, a poet, a philosopher, a great warrior, Guru Gobind Singh ji, in all these roles, performed the great task of inspiring people. He fought against oppression & injustice. His teachings to people focused on breaking the cordons of caste and religion. In this endeavour, he stood to lose a lot on his personal front. But he never let antagonism raise its ugly head in his path. In every moment of his life, the message of love, sacrifice & peace was palpable. His personality was filled to the brim with the greatest of virtues. I’m fortunate that at the beginning of this year, I got an opportunity to participate in the 350th birth anniversary celebration organized at Patna Sahib. Come, let us all resolve to imbibe & abide by lessons from his great teachings & exemplary life and mould our own life in accordance with them.
The 1st of January, 2018, i.e. tomorrow, in my view, is a special day. You’ll be surprised, since the New Year comes every year, the 1st of January arrives every year! But, when I refer to it as special, I really mean it as special. People born in the year 2000 or later; those born in the 21st century will gradually begin to become eligible voters from the 1st of January, 2018. The Indian Democracy welcomes the voters of the 21st century, the ‘New India Voters’. I congratulate our youth & urge them to register themselves as voters. The entire nation is eager to welcome you as voters of the 21st century. As voters of this century, you too must be feeling proud. Your vote will prove to be the bedrock of New India. The power of the vote is the greatest strength of a democracy. The vote is the most effective tool in bringing about a positive change in the lives of millions of people. And it’s not just about you acquiring the right to Vote. It’s about you determining & deciding the course of the nation in the 21stcentury, your dreams in the India of the 21st century. You too can be the makers of 21st century India and this opportunity comes into being, very specially, on the 1st of January. And today, in this edition of Mann Ki Baat, I wish to speak to our successful young men & women between 18 & 25, all infused with energy and resolve.
I consider them ‘New India Youth’, ‘New India Youth’ stands for aspirations, enthusiasm & energy. I firmly believe that the dream of our ‘New India’ will be realized through the skill & fortitude of these energetic youth.
When we talk of new India then that new India will be free from the poison of casteism, communalism, terrorism and corruption; free from filth and poverty. In the New India everyone will have equal opportunity and aspirations and wishes of everyone will be fulfilled. New India will be a place where peace, unity and amity will be our guiding force. My New India Youth should come forward and deliberate on how this New India would be formed. One should decide one’s own path and also decide a way for connecting along those attached to one and the Caravan should get going. You should move forward and thus should the country move ahead. Right now, while taking to you I got an idea whether we could organize a mock parliament in every district of India? Where the youth between 18 and 25 could sit together and brain storm about new India, find ways and chalk our plans. How could we realize our resolves before 2022? How could we build an India of the dreams of our freedom fighters? Mahatma Gandhi had transformed the freedom movement into a mass movement. My young friends, the need of the hour is that we build up a mass movement for making a magnificent- glorious 21st century India; a mass movement of development, a mass movement to build a capable and strong India.
I propose that a mock Parliament be organized around the 15th August in Delhi comprising one young representatives selected from every district of India who would participate and deliberate on how a new India could be formed in the next five years. How can resolve be transformed into reality? Today, a lot of new opportunities have been created for the youth. Our youth are coming forward in areas like skill development, innovation and entrepreneurship and are achieving success. I wish that the New India Youth get information and details of all these new opportunities and plans at one place and a system be created so that every young person on turning 18 should automatically get to know all this and benefit from it.
My dear countrymen, I had talked about positivity during the previous episode of Mann Ki Baat. I am reminded of one Sanskrit Shloka-
 
Utsaaho balwaanarya, Naastyutsaahaatparam balam |
Sotsaahasya cha lokeshu na kinchidapi durlabham ||
 
This means that a man full of enthusiasm is very strong since there is nothing more powerful than zest. Nothing is impossible for a man having positivity and zeal. In English too, it is said, ‘Pessimism leads to weakness, optimism to power’. During the previous episode of Mann Ki Baat, I had appealed to the countrymen to share their positive moments of 2017 and to welcome 2018 in a positive atmosphere.
I am very glad that a large number of people gave positive responses on social media platform, MyGov and the Narendra Modi App and shared their experiences. Lakhs of tweets were posted on Positive India hashtag (#), which reached out to more than nearly 150 crore people. In a way, a wave of positivity which emanated from India spread all over the world. All tweets and responses received were really inspiring. It was indeed a delightful experience. Some countrymen shared those incidents of this year which left a special impact on their minds, a very positive one at that. Some people even shared their personal achievements.
 
# SOUND BITE #
# My name is Meenu Bhatia. I reside in Mayur Vihar, Pocket-1, Phase- I, Delhi. My daughter wanted to do M.B.A. I needed to take a bank loan which I got very easily and my daughter was able to continue her studies.
# My name is Jyoti Rajendra Waade. I am speaking from Bodal. One rupee per month was being deducted towards insurance premium which my husband had subscribed to.  He died in an accident. Only we know of the situation we faced at that time. Assistance from the government helped us a lot and I could gather the strength to stand myself.
# My name is Santosh Jadhav. A national highway has been constructed in 2017 through our village Bhinnar. As a result of this, our roads have improved a lot and business there will surely get a boost.
# My name is Deepanshu Ahuja. I live in Mohalla Saadatganj, district Saharanpur, Uttar Pradesh. Two actions taken by our Indian soldiers deserve a special mention – one was the Surgical Strike carried out in Pakistan which destroyed launching pads of  terrorists and the second was the unique valour displayed by Indian soldiers in Doklam. These are without parallel.
# My name is Satish Bewani. We had a problem of water scarcity in our area and we used to depend on an army pipeline for the last forty years. Now an Independent pipeline has been constructed. So, this is our achievement in 2017.
There are a large number of such persons who have brought in positive transformation in the lives of many people through endeavour at their own level. In fact, this is the New India which we are all collectively building. Let us enter into the New Year with such little achievements, begin our New Year and take concrete steps in the journey from ‘Positive India’ to ‘Progressive India’. When we all talk of positivity, I also feel like sharing one experience. Recently, I came to know about the inspiring story of Anjum Bashir Khan Khattak who is a topper in Kashmir Administrative Service Examination. He actually extricated himself from the sting of terrorism and hatred and topped in the Kashmir Administrative Examination. You will be surprised to know that terrorists had set his ancestral home on fire in 1990.
Terrorism and violence were so widespread there that his family had to leave their ancestral land and flee from there. For a young child, such an atmosphere of violence could easily create darkness and bitterness in the heart, but Anjum did not let it be so. He never gave up hope. He chose a different path for himself – a path of serving the people. He overcame the adverse situation and scripted his own success story. Today, he has become a source of inspiration not only in Jammu & Kashmir but for the youth of the whole country. Anjum has proved that however adverse the circumstances be, the clouds of despair and disappointment can easily be cleared by taking positive steps.
Just last week, I had a chance of meeting some daughters of Jammu & Kashmir. I was amazed at the spirit that they had, the enthusiasm that was there in their hearts and the dreams they nurtured. I was listening to them on how they wanted to make progress in various facets of life and, how their lives were filled with hope. I talked to them, there was no sign of despair; there was only enthusiasm, optimism, energy, dreams and a sense of resolve. Whatever little time I spent with these daughters, I got inspired myself. These are the strength of our nation, they are my youth, they are the future of my country.
My dear countrymen, whenever there is a reference to famous religious places, not only of India but of the whole world, it is very natural to mention about the Sabrimala temple of Kerala. Millions of devotees come to this world famous temple, seeking blessings of Lord Ayyappa Swami. It is a huge challenge maintaining cleanliness around such a large religious place where devotees in such huge number come. And especially, since this place is situated in the midst of hills and forests. But, Sabrimala temple in itself is an example to show how this challenge could be converted into a sanskar, a habit and what a tremendous strength public participation has! One police officer P. Vijayan initiated a programme Punyam Poonkavanam and commenced a voluntary campaign of creating awareness on cleanliness. And, he began a tradition that the yatra of devotees will remain incomplete if they do not contribute by performing some physical labour or the other in the cleanliness programme. No one is big or small in this campaign. Every devotee considers doing physical labour in the cleanliness drive as a part of the Lord’s worship. Every morning, there is a uniquely pleasant scene of cleanliness here when all devotees join in the drive. However big a celebrity be, or however rich one might be or however high an official be – each one contributes as an ordinary devotee in this Punyan Poonkavanam programme and becomes a part of this cleanliness drive.
There are many such examples before us. This cleanliness drive in Sabrimala and the contribution of Punyan Poonkavanam in this are so immense that each devotee contributes and participates in it.
Here, a strong resolve of maintaining cleanliness also is as important as the strict discipline observed during worship.
My dear countrymen, all of us made a resolve on Bapu’s birth anniversary on October 2, 2014 to take forward Bapu’s unfinished task of building a ‘Clean India’ and ‘a filth- free India’. Revered Bapu fought for this cause all through his life and made all out efforts. And, all of us took a resolve that on the 150th birth anniversary of revered Bapu, we shall make some contribution in the direction of making Clean India which he had dreamt of. Efforts in the direction of cleanliness are being widely taken across the whole country. A change can now be seen in the form of public participation in rural and urban areas alike. Cleanliness Survey 2018, the largest in the world, will be conducted from the 4th of January to 10th of March, 2018 to evaluate achievements in cleanliness level of our urban areas. This survey will cover a population of more than 40 crores in more than four thousand cities.
During this survey, the matters to be surveyed include freedom from defecation in the open in cities, collection of garbage, transport facilities to lift garbage, processing of garbage using scientific methods, efforts to usher in behavioural changes, innovative steps taken for capacity building to maintain cleanliness and public participation in this campaign. Separate teams will go to cities for inspection. They will talk to the people there and gather their reactions. They will analyse the use of the Cleanliness App and also about bringing reforms and improvements in various kinds of service centres. It will also be observed whether the cities have created a system wherein cleanliness of cities will became public habit, or the city’s habit for that matter. It is not for the government alone to maintain cleanliness. Every citizen and people’s organizations have a big responsibility. And I appeal to every citizen to actively participate in the Cleanliness Survey to be undertaken in the coming days. And take the full onus to ensure that your city should not lag behind and your street or mohalla should not look to be wanting. I am very sure that using blue and green dustbins to collect dry and wet garbage respectively must have become your habit by now.
For waste- collection the principle of reduce, reuse and re-cycle is very effective. Now ranking of cities will be done on the basis of this survey- if your city has a population of more than one lakh, ranking will be done on the national level and if the population of your city is less than one lakh than it will be ranked on regional level. Achieving the highest ranking must be your dream and you should put all out efforts in this direction. Be sure that you do not remain lagging behind in the Cleanliness Survey to be conducted from 4th January to 10th March, 2018. This should become the talking point in every city. And all of you must have a dream – ‘Our city – our efforts’, ‘Our progress – country’s progress’. Let us all, once again remembering revered Bapu and taking a resolve to build a Clean India, put in our best endeavours.
My dear countrymen, there are a few things which appear small but they have a far reaching impact on our image as a society. Today, in this episode of Mann Ki Baat, I want to share one such thing with you. It has come to our notice that if a Muslim woman wants to go on Haj Pilgrimage, she must have a ‘Mehram’ or a male guardian, otherwise she cannot travel.
When I first heard about it, I wondered how it could be possible! Who would have drafted such rules? Why this discrimination? And when I went into the depth of the matter I was surprised to find that – even after seventy years of our independence, we were the ones who had imposed these restrictions. For decades, injustice was being rendered to Muslim women but there was no discussion on it. Even in many Islamic countries this practice does not exist. But Muslim women in India did not have this right. And I’m glad that our government paid heed to this matter.
Our Ministry of Minority Affairs issued corrective measures and we ameliorated this restriction by phasing out a tradition that had been in practice for the past seventy years. Today, Muslim women can perform Haj without ‘mahram’ or male Guardian and I am happy to note that this time about thirteen hundred Muslim women have applied to perform Haj without ‘mahram’ and women from different parts of the country from Kerala to North India, have expressed their wish to go for the Haj pilgrimage. I have suggested to the Ministry of Minority Affairs that they should ensure that all women who have applied to travel alone be allowed to perform Haj. Usually there is a lottery system for selection of Haj pilgrims but I would like that single women pilgrims should be excluded from this lottery system and they should be given a chance as a special category. I not only reiterate this wholeheartedly but it is my firm belief that the journey of India’s progress has been possible due to women-power and on the basis of their talent and we will continue to march onwards on this path of progress. It should be our constant endeavor that our women also get equal rights and equal opportunities just like men get so that they can proceed simultaneously on the path of progress.
My dear countrymen, 26th January is a historic festival for all of us. But 26th January, 2018, will especially be remembered through the ages. The Republic Day will be celebrated with leaders of all ten ASEAN countries coming to India as Chief Guests.
This time, not one but Ten chief guests would grace the Republic Day. This is unprecedented in India’s history. The year 2017 has been special for both ASEAN and India. ASEAN completed its 50 years of formation in 2017 and in 2017 25 years of India’s partnership with ASEAN were completed. On 26th January the arrival of great leaders of 10 nations of the world as a unit is a matter of pride for all Indians.
My Dear countrymen, this is the season of festivals, by the way our country is a country of festivals. There is hardly a day which does not have a festival ascribed to it. All of us have just celebrated Christmas and the New Year is on its way. May the New Year bring greater happiness, glad tidings and prosperity for all of you. Let us move forward with all renewed zeal, enthusiasm, fervor and new resolve. The month of January is the period of the northward movement of the Earth on the celestial orbit around sun and in this month Makar-Sankranti is also celebrated. This is a festival linked with nature. Though all of our festivals are associated with nature in one way or the other, but in our country blessed with the bounty of cultural diversity, there are different ways to celebrate this wonderful episode of nature in different forms. Lohdi is celebrated in Punjab and North-India, while UP-Bihar eagerly await for Khichdi and Til-Sankranti. In Rajasthan, it is called Sankrant, Magh-bihu in Assam and Pongal in Tamil Nadu – all these festivals are special in their own right and they have their own importance. All of these festivals are usually celebrated between 13th and 17thJanuary.
These festivals may have different names, but their origins stems from attachment to nature and agriculture. Felicitations to all of you on the occasion of these festivals. And once again, best wishes for the New Year 2018 to all of you.
I thank you my dear countrymen. We shall converse again in 2018.
Thank you.




39. JANUARY 28, 2018
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. This is the first episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ in the year 2018. Just a couple of days ago, we celebrated our Republic Day festival with gaiety fervour. This is the very first time in history that heads of 10 Nations attended the ceremony.
My dear countrymen, Shriman Prakash Tripathi has written a rather long letter on the Narendra Modi App, urging me to touch upon the subjects he has referred to. He writes, “The 1 st of February is the death anniversary of astronaut Kalpana Chawla. She left us in the Columbia space shuttle mishap, but not without becoming a source of inspiration for millions of young people the world over”. I am thankful to Bhai Prakash ji for beginning his long letter with the sad departure of Kalpana Chawla. It’s a matter of sorrow for all of us that we lost Kalpana Chawla at that early age, but her life, her work is a message to young women across the world, especially to those in India, that there are no upper limits for Nari Shakti …. the power of women. If one possesses the will & the determination, a firm resolve to achieve something, nothing is impossible. It’s a matter of joy that women in India are taking rapid strides of advancement in all fields, bringing glory to the Nation.
In our country, respect for women, their status in society and their contribution has proved to be awe inspiring to the entire world, since ancient times. There has been a long tradition of Vidushis… women exponents or women champions. Many Vidushis of India have contributed in composing the verses of the Vedas. Lopamudra, Gargi, Maitreyee…it’s a long list of names. Today, we talk about ‘Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao’, ‘save the girl child, educate her’. But centuries ago, it has been mentioned in our ancient texts, in the Skand Puran :
दशपुत्र-समाकन्या, दशपुत्रान् प्रवर्धयन्
यत फलम् लभते मRर्य:, तत् लभ्यम् कन्यकैकया ॥
This means, a daughter is the equivalent of ten sons. The ‘Punya’ that you earn through ten sons amounts to the same earned through just one daughter. This underscores the importance that has been given to women in our society. And that is why, in our society, women have been accorded the status of ‘Shakti’. This woman power binds closely together society as a whole, the family as a whole, on the axis of unity & oneness. Be it the erudition of the Vidushis of the Vedic Period. Lopamudra, Gargi, Maitreyee; be it the learning & devotion of Akka Mahadevi or Meerabai, be it the governance of Ahilyabai Holkar or the valour of Rani Lakshmibai, woman power has always inspired us. They have always brought glory to the Nation.
Shriman Prakash Tripathi has further cited some examples. He writes that the flight of our courageous Defence Minister Nirmala Seetharaman in a Sukhoi 30 fighter plane is inspirational for him. He also refers to INSV Tarini, with an all women crew on board under the command of Vartika Joshi, which is currently circumnavigating the globe. Three braveheart women Bhavna Kanth, Mohana Singh and Avani Chaturvedi have become fighter pilots and are undergoing training on the Sukhoi- 30. An Air India Boeing jet with an all woman crew led by Kshamata Vajpayee flew from Delhi to San Francisco, USA and back. These are all women achievers. You are absolutely right. Today women are not just advancing in myriad fields; they are leaders. Today there are many sectors where our woman power is playing a pioneering role, establishing milestones. A few days ago, Hon’ble President took an initiative. He met a group of extraordinary women who have achieved something significanty new in their respective fields. Women achievers of our country… the first female Merchant Navy Captain, the first female passenger train driver, the first female fire fighter, the first female Bus Driver, the first woman to set foot on Antarctica, the first woman to reach Mount Everest… ‘First Ladies’ in every field. Our woman power achieved extraordinary feats, breaking the age old shackles of social mores, creating new records. They proved that through perseverance, grit and a firm resolve, all kinds of obstacles and barriers can be broken & crossed, to chart out an all new path… a path that could act as a beacon of inspiration not just to their contemporaries, but for generations to come. It will infuse afresh energy, newer enthusiasm into them. A book has beencompiled on these women achievers, first ladies, so that, the entire country comes to know about the power of these women and derive inspiration from their life work. This is also available as an e-book on the Narendra Modi Website.
The country’s woman power has contributed a lot in the positive transformation being witnessed in our country & society these days. Today, as we speak of women empowerment, I would like to refer to a railway station. You must be wondering what a railway station has got to do with women empowerment. Matunga station in Mumbai is the first station in India which is run by an all woman staff. All departments have women performing duties… the commercial department, Railway Police, Ticket checking, Announcing, Point persons, it’s a staff comprising over 40 women. This time, after watching the Republic Day Parade, many people wrote on Twitter and other social media that a major highlight of the parade was the BSF biker contingent comprising women participants. Daredevil stunts performed by them was awe inspiring for our foreign guests. Empowerment is another form of self reliance. Today our Nari Shakti is assuming leadership roles. It is becoming self reliant. By the way, this also reminds me of tribal women of Chattisgarh, who have done something extraordinary and set a remarkable example. When we refer to Adivasi women, a stereotypical image comes to our minds, comprising jungles, pathways in the woods and women carrying kindlewood on their heads.But the woman power of Chattisgarh, the tribal women there broke this stereotype & presented an all new picture of themselves. Dantewada in Chattisgarh is a Maoist infested region. Violence, torture, explosives, guns, pistols… the Maoists have created a scary reign of terror. In this dangerous atmosphere, Adivasi women are becoming self reliant by driving e-rickshaws. In a short span of time, a umber of women have become part of this phenomenon. This has three benefits- on the one hand self-employment has empowered them; on the other, the Maoist infested region is witnessing a transformation. And simultaneously as a consequence, it is strengthening efforts towards protecting the environment. I laud the efforts of the District Administration which has played a significant role in the successful endeavour of these women by ensuring availability of grants imparting training to them.
Time and again we keep hearing people utter ‘There is something special that we as a people possess… no threat is big enough to annihilate our existence’. What is that ‘Special Something’? That ‘Something’ is flexibility, the ability of transformation. Leaving out things that are beyond the constraints of time and accepting betterment in things wherever necessary. And this is a salient feature of our society… relentless efforts towards self-improvement, self correction. We have inherited this Indian tradition as a cultural legacy. The benchmark of any living society is its self correcting mechanism. In our country, there have been unending endeavours against social ills and evil practices, both individually & collectively. Just a while ago, Bihar launched an interesting initiative. In order to uproot social ills in the state, the world’s longest human chain spanning over thirteen thousand kilometers was formed.
This campaign made people aware of social maladies such as child-marriage and the dowry system. The entire state thus resolved to fight against these social evils. Children, the elderly, the youth full of energy and enthusiasm, women, girls turned out to participate in this battle. The human chain that commenced formation from Gandhi Maidan in Patna gained momentum, touching the state borders. In order to ensure that the fruits of progress rightly reach all sections of society, it is imperative that our society is freed of these ills. Come, let us pledge to come together to wipe out these evil customs from our social fabric… let us build an empowered, capable New India. I appreciate the people of Bihar, the Chief Minister, the administration, in fact every member of the human chain for this massive, special initiative towards social welfare.
My dear countrymen, Shriman Darshan from Mysore, Karnataka has written on My gov. He was undergoing an expenditure of six thousand rupees a month on medicines alone for the treatment of his father. Earlier, he wasn’t aware of the Pradhan Mantri Jan Aushadhi Yojana. But now that he’s come to know of the Jan Aushadhi Kendra, he has begun purchasing medicines from there and his expenses have been reduced by about 75%. He has expressed his wish that I mention this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, so that it reaches the maximum number of people and they can benefit from it. Over some time lately, many have written on this subject; many of them have been telling me about it. I too have seen videos put up on social media by beneficiaries of this scheme. It is a matter of joy learning about happenings like these. It gives you inner satisfaction. I felt good to see Shriman Darshan ji think about sharing with others what he gained from it. The motive behind this scheme is making healthcare affordable and encouraging Ease of Living. Medicines available at the Jan Aushadhi Centres are 50% to 90% cheaper than branded drugs available in the market. This is great help for the common man, especially for senior citizens who require medicines on a daily basis and results in a lot of savings. Generic medicines sold under this scheme strictly conform to prescribed standards set by the World Health Organisation. That is why good quality medicines are made available at affordable prices. Today, over three thousand Jan Aushadhi Kendras have been set up across the country. This has led to not only availability of cheaper medicines, but also new employment opportunities for individual entrepreneurs. Affordable medicines are now available at ‘Amrit Stores’ at Pradhan Mantri Bharatiya Jan Aushadhi Centres & at hospitals. The sole aim behind this step is ensuring availability of Quality & affordable health service to the poorest of the poor, so that a healthy & prosperous India comes into being.
My dear countrymen, Shri Mangesh from Maharashtra has shared a photo on the Narendra Modi Mobile App. It was such a striking photo that my attention was magnetically drawn towards. The photo showed that a grandson was participating in the Clean Morna River along with his grandfather. I came to know that the citizens of Akola had organized a cleanliness campaign to clean the Morna river under the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan The Morna river was a perennial river flowing throughout the twelve months of the year but now it has become seasonal. The second painful fact was that the river was completely filled with wild grass and hyacinth. A lot of garbage was being dumped into the river and along its banks. An action plan was chalked out and on January 13 th a day before Makar-Sankranti, in the first phase of Mission Clean Morna sanitation of the two sides of the bank of the Morna river at fourteen places spread over an area of four kilometers, was carried out.
This noble and grand task named Mission Clean Morna involved more than six thousand denizens of Akola, more than 100 NGOs, Colleges, Students, children, the elderly, mothers, sisters, almost everybody participated in this task. On January 20 th , 2018, this Sanitation Campaign continued in the same vein and I’ve been told that this campaign will continue every Saturday morning till the Morna river is completely cleaned. Mission Clean Morna shows that if a person is determined to do something, then nothing is impossible. Huge social reforms can be brought about through mass movements. I congratulate the people of Akola, the district and the municipal corporation’s administration, all the citizens who were associated with this mass movement, I laud your efforts which are not only very much appreciated but this will inspire the other citizens of the country.
My dear countrymen, these days you must be hearing a lot about the Padma Awards. These awards also attract attention innewspapers and television also. But if you scrutinize, then you will be proud of the fact that there many loftier personalities amidst us and you will naturally be proud of the very fact that today the common man is being cited for Padma awards without any recommendations. There was a certain methodology of awarding Padma Awards every year, but this entire process has been changed for the past three years. Now any citizen can nominate any person in our country. Transparency has been brought about in the entire process by making it operable online. In a way, the selection of these awards has been transformed completely. You may have noticed that many ordinary people not visible in big cities, in newspapers or on TV are being awarded with Padma citations. Now the identity of the awardee is not the deciding factor of the award, rather the importance of his work is increasing. You must have heard the name of Arvind Gupta ji. It will gladden your heart to know, that Arvind ji, a student of IIT Kanpur, spent all his life creating toys for children. He has been making toys from garbage for over four decades so that children can increase their curiosity towards science.
He has been trying to get children inspired to conduct scientific experiments using waste; towards this end he has been encouraging children by showing them films made in 18 languages in three thousand schools across the country. What a wonderful life, what a dedicated mission! A similar story is that of Sitavaa Jodatti from Karnataka. She has not been hailed as Goddess of women empowerment just for nothing! For the past three decades, in Belagavi, she has made a great contribution towards changing the lives of countless women. At the age of seven she had dedicated herself as a Devadasi but in a turnaround, for the welfare of the Devdasis, she has spent her entire life. Not only this, she has done unprecedented work for the welfare of Dalit women too. You must have heard the name of Bhajju Shyam of Madhya Pradesh, Shri Bhajju Shyam was born in a very poor tribal family. He was employed in a small job for eking out his living, but he was also fond of painting in the traditional tribal art form. Today, due to this hobby, he garnered respect not only in India but the entire world. He has exhibited his paintings in many countries like Netherlands, Germany, England and Italy. The talent of Bhajju Shyam ji, who made India proud in many nations abroad, was also recognized and he was awarded the Padma Shri.
You will be pleasantly surprised listening to the story of Keralas tribal lady Lakshmikutti. Laxmikutty is a teacher in Kallar and still resides in a hut made of palm leaves in a tribal tract amidst dense forests. She has created five hundred herbal medicines relying solely on her memory. She has mastery in synthesizing medicines used for treatment of snake bites. Lakshmi Ji is continuously serving society with her knowledge of herbal medicines. Identifying her anonymous persona, she has been honoured with the Padma Shri for her contribution to society. I would like to mention another name today, that of 75 year old Subhasini Mistri, hailing from West Bengal, who was selected for the award. Subhasini Mistri is a woman who, in order to construct a hospital, cleaned utensils in the homes of others and also sold vegetables. At the age of 23 she lost her husband due to lack of proper treatment, and this incident inspired her to build a hospital for the poor. Today, thousands of poor people are treated free of cost in this hospital that has come up through hard-work. I am convinced that there are many men and women in our land filled with gems, Bahuratna-Vasundhara, many gifted women and men who remain faceless or unknown.The failure to identify such people is also a loss to the society, the Padma awards are only a medium of acknowledgement, but I would also like to tell the countrymen that people serving the society around us, people giving up all that they have got for the sake of society, millions of people who have worked for a life time for us bestowed with one or the other useful attribute should be acknowledged in our midst. They do not labour for any honor, but their work inspires us. These people should be invited to schools and colleges to share their experiences. Beyond awards, there should be some more efforts from our society in acknowledging their contribution.
My dear countrymen, we celebrate Pravasi Bharatiya Divas on January 9 th every year. It was on the 9 th of January, when our revered Mahatma Gandhi returned to India from South Africa. On this day, we celebrate the unbreakable bond that exists between Indians in India and Indians living around the globe. This year we organized a program on Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, where all MPs and Mayors of Indian origin were invited. You will be pleased to know that in this programme, Malaysia, New Zealand, Switzerland, Portugal, Mauritius, Fiji, Tanzania, Kenya, Canada, Britain, Surinam, South Africa and America, and many other countries wherever our Mayors or MPs of Indian Origin exist, all of them participated. I am happy that the people of Indian origin who live in different countries continue to serve those countries and at the same time they have maintained their strong relationship with India as well
This time, the European Union, has sent me a calendar, in which they have displayed the contributions by Indians in various fields of life living in different countries of Europe; whether working in the field of cyber security, or dedicated to Ayurveda, entertaining the society through music, or through poetry; someone researching on climate change or working on ancient Indian texts, someone driving a truck for livelihood, who went on to construct a Gurudwara or has built a mosque – wherever our people are, they have in their own way embellished or adorned the land of their adoption. I would thus like to thank the European Union, for recognizing the people of Indian origin and through them in making people in India and people the world over aware of their exemplary work.
The 30 th of January is the death anniversary of our revered Bapu, who showed us a new path. On that day we also observe martyrs day in solemn memory of the great martyrs who sacrificed their lives for the defense of the country and pay our homage at 11 in the morning. The path of peace and non-violence, is the path of Bapu and this is applicable not only for India or the world, but also for a person or a family or a society. The ideals which Bapu practiced in his life, things that he imparted are relevant even today. They were not just mere theories. At present we witness at every step how accurate Bapus words were. What can be a bigger tribute than taking a vow that we shall tread the path of Bapu – and walk, as far as possible?
My dear countrymen, with my best wishes to all of you for 2018, my speech draws to a close. Thank you very much.
Namaskar.


40. FEBRUARY 25, 2018
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
Let us begin today’s Mann Ki Baat with a phone call.
Phone Call…
Thank you very much for your phone call. My young friends have asked me many questions related to Science; they keep writing on quite a few points. All of us have seen that the sea appears blue, but we know from routine life experiences that water has no colour at all. Have we ever thought why water acquires colour in rivers and seas? The same thought occurred to a young man in the 1920s. The same question gave rise to a great scientist of modern India. When we talk about Science, the first name that strikes us is that of Bharat Ratna Sir C.V.Raman. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for his outstanding work on light scattering. One of his discoveries is famous as the Raman Effect.
We celebrate the 28th of February as National Science Day since on this very day, he is said to have discovered the phenomenon of light scattering, for which the Nobel Prize was conferred upon him. This land has given birth to many a great scientist. On the one hand, there has been a tradition of great Mathematicians like Bodhayan, Bhaskar, Brahmagupt and Aryabhatt; on the other, in the field of medicine, Sushrut & Charak have bestowed upon us a place of pride. Right from Sir Jagdish Chandra Bose and Hargobind Khurana to Satyendranath Bose have brought laurels to India. The famous particle BOSON has been named after Satyendranath Bose. Recently I got an opportunity to take part in a programme in Mumbai – the inauguration of the Wadhwani Institute for Artificial Intelligence. It was interesting to know about the ongoing miraculous accomplishments in the field of Science. Artificial Intelligence aids in making robots, Bots and other machines meant for specific tasks. Through self learning, machines today can enhance their intelligence to a smarter level. This technology can be harnessed to better the lives of the underprivileged, the marginalized and the needy. In that programme on Artificial Intelligence, I urged the scientific community to deliberate on how Artificial Intelligence could help us make life easier for our divyang brothers & sisters. Can we make better predictions of natural disasters using Artificial Intelligence? Can we use it to provide assistance to farmers on crop yield? Can Artificial Intelligence be used as tool to simplify the outreach of health services and modernize medical treatment?
A few days ago, I got an opportunity to accompany the Prime Minister of Israel to Ahmedabad, Gujarat for the inauguration of ‘I create’. There a young person referred to developing a digital instrument that converts the written word into voice. This is to aid those who are incapable of speech to converse normally like any other person. I feel we can harness Artificial Intelligence in many such fields.
Science and Technology are value neutral. They don’t possess any value in themselves. Any machine will work the way we want it to. It entirely depends on us what task we want it to perform. Here human objectives assume significance; the use of Science for the sole purpose of human welfare, with the endeavour to assist human lives touch the greatest heights.
Thomas Alva Edison, the inventor of the light bulb, failed many a time in his experiments. Once, on being asked about it, he quipped, “I have devised ten thousand ways of how NOT to make a light bulb”. What I mean to say is, Edison transformed even his failures into his own strength. Coincidentally, I am fortunate today to be in Auroville, the land, the karmabhoomi of Maharshi Arvind. As a revolutionary, he challenged British rule, fought against them and questioned subjugation. Thus, as a great sage, he questioned every facet of life. Extracting answers, he showed the right path to humanity. The relentless quest to ask questions for knowing the truth is very important. And this is the very essence, the real inspiration behind scientific inventions and discoveries. Never rest till every ‘why’, ‘what’ & ‘how’ are answered. I congratulate our scientists, and all those connected with Science on the occasion of National Science Day. May our young generation be inspired for the quest of truth & knowledge; may they be motivated to serve society through Science. I wish them the best.
Friends, safety in the times of crises, disasters are topics on which many messages keep coming in- people keep writing to me. In a comment posted on Narendra Modi Mobile App, Shriman Ravindra Singh from Pune has referred to occupational safety. He writes that in our country, safety standards at factories and construction sites are not upto the mark. Since the 4th of March is National Safety Day, the Prime Minister should include safety in the Mann Ki Baat programme in order to raise awareness on safety. When we refer to public safety, two aspects are very important- proactiveness and preparedness. Safety is of two kinds – one is safety during disasters and the other is safety in everyday life. If we are not aware of safety in daily life, if we are not able to attain a certain level, it will get extremely difficult during the time of disasters. We often read signboards on streets bearing lines such as – ‘सतर्कता हटी – दुर्घटना घटी’ – ‘Lose alertness – invite mishaps’ or ‘एक भूल करे नुकसान, छीने खुशियां और मुस्कान’ – ‘One mistake can cost you dear- rob you of your joy & smile’ or इतनी जल्दी न दुनिया छोड़ो, सुरक्षा से अब नाता जोड़ो – ‘Don’t be in a hurry to leave this world – embrace the culture of safety’ or सुरक्षा से न करो कोई मस्ती वर्ना जिन्दगी होगी सस्ती – ‘Don’t play around with safety, your life will be treated cheap’. Beyond that, these sentences serve no purpose in our lives. Leave aside natural disasters; most of the mishaps are a consequence of some mistake or the other on our part. If we stay alert, abide by the prescribed rules & regulations, we shall not only be able to save our own lives but we can prevent catastrophes harming society. There are times when we come across many slogans on safety at the work place but none following their letter and spirit. I urge the fire brigade under corporations and municipalities to visit school children once a week or once a month and perform mock drills for them. This will have a dual benefit – the fire brigade will undergo an exercise in readiness and the new generation will get lessons in alertness. And all this at no added cost. In a way it will a natural part of the overall learning curve. India is a land of geographic and climatic diversities. As far as disasters are concerned, this country has borne the brunt of many a natural as well as man made disaster, such as chemical & industrial mishaps. Today, the National Disaster Management Authority, NDMA is the vanguard when it comes to dealing with disasters in the country. During earthquakes, floods, cyclones, landslides, NDMA reaches the area within no time. They have issued guidelines; simultaneously they keep imparting training on a regular basis for capacity building. In Districts prone to floods and cyclones, an initiative names ‘Aapada Mitra’ has been launched for training Volunteers. Training and awareness have a very important role to play. Two- three years ago, thousands of people would lose their lives every year due to heat-wave. After that, NDMA organized workshops on heat wave management as part of a campaign to raise awareness in people. Mass participation led to good results. In 2017, the death toll on account of heat wave remarkably came down to around 220 or so. This proves that if we accord priority to safety, we can actually attain safety. I laud the role played by innumerable individuals, citizens who immediately embark upon rescue and relief operations wherever a disaster strikes. And there are numerous such unnamed, unsung heroes. Our Fire & Rescue services, National Disaster Response Forces Armed Forces, Paramilitary Forces… these brave hearts go beyond the call of duty to help people in distress, often risking their own lives. Organisations like NCC and Scouts are also contributing in this task; they are getting trained too. Recently we have made an attempt to have joint exercise for disaster management between countries on the lines of joint military exercise involving different countries of the world. India has made a pioneering effort – BIMSTEC, Bangladesh, India, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Bhutan & Nepal – a joint disaster management exercise involving these countries was undertaken. It was a novel humanitarian experiment on a large scale. We’ll have to turn ourselves into a risk conscious society. In our culture, we often talk of safety of values; we now need to realize the values of safety. We’ll have to make it part of our life, our being. In day to day life, during air travel, we must have frequently come across air hostesses giving out a rather longish speech, safety instructions at the beginning of a flight. We must have heard it hundreds of times. But today if one of us is taken inside an aircraft and asked about the location of equipments, say life jackets, and how to use them, I can say for sure that none of us will be able to give the right answer. So, was there a provision for giving our information? Yes, there was. Was there a scope of direct visibility when the information was given? Of course there was. But we did not respond actively. WHY? Because by nature, we are not conscious. And that is why our ears hear when we sit in the aircraft, but no one realizes that ‘these instructions are for me’. We experience this in all walks of life. Let us not think that safety is only meant for someone else. If all of us become conscious and aware of our own safety, the essence of safety of society will be inbuilt.
My dear countrymen, in the current budget, emphasis has been laid on turning ‘waste to wealth’ and ‘waste to energy’ through Bio gas, under the Swachch Bharat Campaign. An effort was initiated which was named GOBAR-Dhan – Galvanizing Organic Bio Agro Resources. The aim of this GOBAR- DHAN scheme is ensuring cleanliness in villages and generating wealth and energy by converting cattle dung and solid agricultural waste into Compost and Bio Gas. India is home to the highest cattle population in the world, close to 300 million in number, with a daily output of 3 million tonnes of dung. Some European countries and China use animal dung and other Bio-waste to produce energy. But India was lacking full capacity utilization. Under the Swachch Bharat Mission (Rural), we are taking rapid strides in this direction.
A target has been set to use cattle dung, agricultural waste, kitchen waste to produce Bio gas based energy. Under the Gobardhan Scheme our farmer brothers & sisters in rural India will be encouraged to consider dung and other waste not just as a waste but as a source of income. Under the aegis of ‘GobarDhanYojana’, many benefits will accrue to rural areas. It will be easier to keep the village clean and sanitized, livestock health will improve and farm yields will increase. Biogas generation will increase self-reliance in energy utilized for cooking and lighting. Farmers and cattle herders will be helped in augmenting their income. There will be novel opportunities for newer jobs linked to waste collection, transportation, biogas sales etc. An online trading platform will be created for better implementation of ‘Gobar Dhan Yojana’, it will connect farmers to buyers so that farmers can get the right price for dung and agricultural waste. I urge entrepreneurs, especially our sisters residing in rural India, to step forward, and through creation of self-help groups and cooperative societies extract full advantage from this opportunity. I invite you to become part of the movement comprising clean energy and green jobs, to become a part of the initiative to convert waste in your village to wealth and by converting dung into ‘Gobar dhan.’
My dear countrymen, till date, we have been hearing about the myriad types of festivals – be it music festivals, food festivals, film festivals and many other kinds of festivals. But in a unique endeavor in Raipur, Chhattisgarh, the state’s first ‘Trash Mahotsav’ was organized. The objective behind this festival sponsored by Raipur Municipal Corporation was to generate awareness about cleanliness and the methods using which city’s waste can be creatively used and inculcate awareness about various ways to recycle the garbage. A plethora of activities were organized during this festival, which found full participation of students and adults. Different types of artifacts were made utilizing garbage. Many Workshops were organized to inform people on the entire aspects of waste management. Music performances linked to the theme of hygiene were held and art works were created. Raipur inspired various types of such garbage or trash festivals in other districts too. Many individuals taking initiative on their own behalf shared innovative ideas, held discussions, conducted poetry recitals. A festive atmosphere regarding cleanliness got geared up. The way the school children took part in the entire endeavor was amazing. For the innovative manner in which importance of waste management and cleanliness were displayed in this festival, I congratulate the people of Raipur Municipal Corporation, the entire populace of Chhattisgarh, its government and administration.
Every year on March 8, ‘International Women’s Day’ is celebrated. There are many programs that are held in our country and the world. On this day, women are also felicitated with ‘Nari Shakti Puraskar’ who have performed exemplary tasks in different sectors in the past. Today the country is moving forward from the path of Women development to women-led development. On this occasion, I remember the words of Swami Vivekananda. He’d said ‘The idea of ​​perfect womanhood is perfect independence’ – This idea of ​​Swami ji about one hundred and twenty five years ago expresses the contemplation of woman power in Indian culture. Today, it is our duty to ensure the participation of women in every field of life, be it social or economic life, it is our fundamental duty. We are part of a tradition where men were identified due to women-Yashoda-Nandan, Kaushalya-Nandan, Gandhari-Putra, these were identities of a son. Today our woman power has shown inner fortitude and self-confidence, has made herself self-reliant. Not only has she advanced herself but has carried forward the country and society to newer heights.
After all, our dream of ‘New India’ is the one where women are strong and empowered and are equal partners in the development of the country. A few days ago, a gentleman had given me a very sound proposition. He had suggested that on 8th March myriad events herald ‘Women’s Day’ Why cannot we felicitate mothers and sisters who have completed 100 years in every Indian village or city,? Can a program of paying respect for such centenarians be held and cannot we reflect upon a life lived long? I liked the idea and I’m bouncing it with you will find many examples of what woman power can achieve, If you look around near yourself many such inspiring stories will appear. I just received news from Jharkhand wherein under the ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’, about 1.5 million women in Jharkhand – and this figure is not a small one organized a hygiene campaign for an entire month! Under the auspices of this campaign starting from January 26, 2018, these women constructed 1 lakh 70 thousand toilets in just 20 days and made a record of sorts. There were about one lakh ‘Sakhi Mandals,’ 14 lakh women, 2 thousand women Panchayat representatives, 29 thousand water carriers, 10 thousand female cleaners and 50 thousand women masons were involved in this campaign. You can imagine what a mammoth undertaking it was! These women of Jharkhand have shown that women power is an integral component of ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’, which will change the course of the campaign of cleanliness in general life, the effective role of hygiene in the nature of the people ingeneral.
My dear Brothers and sisters, I was just watching the TV news two days ago that electricity has reached three villages of the Elephanta island after 70 years of independence, and this has led to much joy and enthusiasm among the people there. You all know very well, that Elephanta is located 10 kms by the sea from Mumbai. It is a very important tourist destination. The caves of Elephanta are marked as the World Heritage sites by UNESCO and draw tourists from all over the country and abroad. I was surprised to know that despite being such a prominent center of tourism its close proximity from Mumbai, electricity hadn’t reached Elephanta after so many years of independence. For 70 years, the lives of the denizens of three villages of the Elephanta Island, Rajbunder, Morbandar and Centabandar, were engulfed by darkness, which has got dispelled now and there is brightness in their lives. I congratulate the administration and the populace there. I am glad that now the villages of Elephanta and the caves of Elephanta will be lighted due to electrification. This is not just electricity, but a new beginning of a period of development. There is no greater contentment and joy than the fact that the lives of the countrymen be full of shine and there be happiness in their lives.
My dear brothers and sisters, we just celebrated the festival of Shivaratri. And now the month of March beckons us with ripe crops in the fields, playful golden earrings of wheat and the captivating blossom of mango pleasing to the mind are the highlights of this month. But this month is also very special to all of us because of the festival of Holi. On 2nd March the entire country immersed in joy will celebrate the festival of Holi.  In The festival of Holi, the importance of colors is as important as the ceremony of ‘HolikaDahan’ because it is the day when we burn our inherent vices in the fire. Holi makes us forget our rancours and gives us an opportunity to be a part of each other’s happiness and glad tidings, and it conveys the message of love, unity and brotherhood. I wish a very joyous festival of Holi to all my countrymen, I further wish you colour laden felicitations. I wish and hope that this festival forever remains a festival of colourful cheer in the lives of all the countrymen- this is my wish. My dear countrymen, thank you very much


41. MARCH 25, 2018
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today is the holy day of Ram Navami. My heartiest greetings to countrymen on this pious, festive occasion. We have seen how closely the power of ‘Ram Naam’, the chant of Lord Ram’s name, permeated every moment of revered Bapu’s life. A while ago, when distinguished dignitaries of all ASEAN Countries were here on the 26th of January, they were accompanied by cultural troupes from their respective countries. And it’s a matter of immense pride that a majority of these countries presented the Ramayan in front of us. This signifies that Ram & Ramayan continues to inspire and have a positive impact, not just in India, but in that part of the world too. Once again, my best wishes to all of you on the occasion of Ramnavami.
My dear countrymen, just like every time earlier, I have received a rather large number of letters, e mails, phone calls and comments from you. I read a post written on MyGov by Komal Thakkar ji, where she has referred to starting on-line courses for Sanskrit. Alongwith being IT professional, your love for Sanskrit has gladdened me. I have instructed the concerned department to convey to you efforts being made in this direction. I shall also request listeners of Mann Ki Baat who are engaged in the field of Sanskrit, to ponder over ways & means to take Komalji’s suggestion forward.
Shriman Ghanshyam Kumar ji of Village Baraakar, District Nalanda, Bihar – I read your comments written on the Narendra Modi App. The concerns you have raised on the depleting ground water levels is indeed of great importance.
Shriman Sakal Shastriji, you mentioned ‘Karnataka’… you beautifully maintained a delicate balance between words when you wrote ‘Ayushman Bharat’; ‘Long live India’ will be possible only when we express ‘Ayushman Bhoomi; ‘Long live the land’; and that will be conceivable only when we begin feeling concerned about every living being on this land. You have urged one and all to retain and keep aside some water for birds & animals, during summer time. Sakal ji, I have conveyed your sentiments to our listeners.
Shriman Yogesh Bhadresha Ji has asked me to speak to the youth concerning their health. He feels that our youth are physically weak, compared to those of other Asian countries. Yogesh ji, I feel I should speak in detail to all of you on ‘Fit India’. In fact, all you young people can come together to launch a movement of Fit India.
Recently, the President of France paid a visit to Kashi, Varanasi based Shriman Prashant Kumar has written that glimpses of that visit were extremely touching, appealing & left a deep impact. And it is his heart felt desire to see all those photos & videos being shared on social media. Prashant ji, the Government of India has already done that on social media and the Narendra Modi App, beginning that very day. You may now like them, re-tweet them, post them to your friends.
Anagha, Jayesh and many other children from Chennai  have written & posted to me their heartfelt thoughts on the gratitude cards, the post script to the book ‘Exam Warriors’. Let me tell Anagha, Jayesh & other children that these letters enliven me up after a hard day’s work. Now, if I start including all those phone calls, comments, whatever I could read or hear, many of which touched my heart; if I exclusively speak about them, perhaps I’ll require a few months to respond to them in some way or the other.
This time, maximum number of letters are from children who have written about exams. They have shared their vacation plans. They’ve expressed their concern on the availability of water for birds & animals. Our farmer brothers & sisters have written on Kisan Melas, Farmer Carnivals and activities revolving around farming, being held across the country. Quite a few active citizens have sent in suggestions on the subject of water conservation. Ever since we have begun conversing with each other in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ through the medium of radio, I have noticed a pattern that in the sweltering heat of this season, most letters focus around topic pertaining to summer time. Just before examinations, letter pour in, touching on the anxieties of our young student friends who are about to appear. During the festival season, our festivals, our culture, our traditions are focused upon. This means, Mann Ki Batein, matters close to our hearts, alter with the change in season. And it’s equally true that our heartfelt thoughts do bring about a change of season in someone’s life, figuratively speaking. And why should not things change? In utterances of yours, in your experiences, in the examples that you quote, there exists immense inspiration, unfathomable energy, unparalleled warmth; a resolve to bring about something new for the country. In a way, this is endowed with the might to transform the entire season-cycle of the country. When I get to read in your letters how a rickshaw puller from Karimgunj in Assam, Ahmed Ali, has built nine schools for underprivileged children, I witness firsthand the indomitable will-power this country possesses. When I heard the story of Kanpur based Dr. Ajit Mohan Choudhary, of how he visits the underprivileged on footpaths and offers free medicines to them, it gives one an opportunity to feel the sense of brotherhood that prevails in the country. Thirteen years ago, on account of a delay in medical treatment, a Cab driver from Kolkata, Saidul Laskar lost his sister. He vowed to construct a hospital in order to ensure that none of the underprivileged face a similar situation due to lack of medical aid. In this mission of his, Saidul sold off family jewellery and raised funds through charity. His cab passengers too contributed large-heartedly. A young engineer girl donated her first salary for this noble cause. This way, after mobilizing funds for twelve long years, Saidul’s mammoth efforts paid rich dividends. Today, through sheer hard work and a firm resolve, a thirty bedded hospital has finally come up at Punri Village near Kolkata. This is the power of New India. In Uttar Pradesh, when a woman builds 125 toilets after overcoming steep challenges, inspiring women to exercise their due rights, it gives us a glimpse of ‘Matri- Shakti’, the power of maternal love & caring. Innumerable shining examples like these are the hallmark of our country. Today the whole world has changed the way it looks at India. The name ‘India’ now evokes a sense of awe & respect; the reason behind it is the ‘Purusharth’, the resolute yet selfless inner strength of such illustrious sons & daughters of Mother India. Today, the entire country, the youth, women, the marginalized, the underprivileged, the middle class, in fact every section has awakened to a new confidence … YES, we can go forward, the country can take great strides. An atmosphere of positivity built on a self confidence filled with hope has pervaded all over. This self confidence, this very positivity will by a catalyst in realising our resolve of New India, of making our dream come true.
My dear countrymen, the coming months are very crucial for our farming brothers and sisters. That is why a large number of letters on agriculture have been received. This time, I requisitioned and viewed videos of discussions with our farmers on DD Kisan Channel of Doordarshan and I feel that each farmer should get connected to this DD Kisan Channel of Doordarshan, view it and adopt those practices in his/ her own farm. From Mahatma Gandhi to Shastri ji, Lohia ji, Chaudhari Charan Singh ji, Chaudhari Devi Lal ji – they all recognized agriculture and the farmer as vital aspects of the nation’s economy and also for the common man’s life. How attached was Mahatma Gandhi attached to the soil, they farms and the farmer is reflected from this sentence in which he said- “To forget how to dig earth and to tend the soil, is to forget ourselves. Similarly, Lal Bahadur Shastriji generally insisted on conservation of trees, plants and vegetation and also highlighted the importance of an improvised agricultural infrastructure. Dr. Ram Manohar Lal ji had talked of creating a mass awakening on an extensive scale about the necessary measures to ensure a better income for our farmers and provide better irrigation facilities and to increase food and milk production. Chaudhari Charan Singh in his speech in 1979 had urged our farmers to use new technology and to adopt new innovations and underlined their vital significance. I recently visited the Krishi Unnati Mela organized in New Delhi.
It was a pleasant experience for me to talk to our farmer brothers and sisters and scientists and to listen and understand their experiences in farming and getting to know about innovations in the agricultural sector. But one thing that impressed me most was Meghalaya and the hard work of the farmers of the state. This state has a small area but it has attained a grand success. Our farmers in Meghalaya, in the year 2015-16, achieved record production as compared to the last five years. They have showed that if once the targets are set, spirits are high and with a strong resolve, the set targets can most certainly be attained. Today, the farmers have technology to help them while they work hard in their fields. This has provided a big boost to our agro- producers. I have received a number of letters in which a large number of farmers have written about MSP and they wanted that I should talk to them at length over this.
Brothers and sisters, in this year’s budget a big decision has been taken to ensure that farmers get a fair price for their produce. It has been decided that the MSP of notified crops will be fixed at least one and a half times of their cost. If I may elaborate on this, MSP will include labour  cost of other workers employed, expenses incurred on own animals and cost of animals and machinery taken on rent, cost of seeds, cost of each type of fertilizer used, irrigation cost, land revenue paid to the State Government, interest paid on working capital, ground rent in case of leased land and not only this but also the cost of labour of the farmer himself or any other person of his family who contributes his or her labour in agricultural work will also be added to the cost of production. Moreover, an extensive exercise on agricultural reforms is being undertaken across the country in order to ensure that our farmers get a fair price for their crop. Efforts are on to connect local village mandis to wholesale market and then on with the global market. Twenty- two thousand rural haats in the country will be upgraded by creating the necessary infrastructure and these will be integrated with APMC and e-NAM platform- so that the farmers would not have to go to distant places for selling their produce. In other words, such a system is being set up where in farms in any part of the country will have a market-connect.
My dear countrymen, this year Mahatma Gandhi’s 150th birth anniversary celebrations will begin. How should the country celebrate it? Swachch Bharat is already our resolve; besides this, how can our 125 crore countrymen pay the best tribute to Gandhiji by working in close harmony? Which newer programmes can be initiated? What new practices or procedures can be adopted? I request you all to share your opinions and suggestions with everyone via MyGov. What should be the logo for ‘Gandhi 150’? What should be the slogan, mantra or a catch-phrase? Send your suggestions on all of these. We all have to pay a memorable tribute to Bapu and have to take the country to newer heights by drawing inspiration from Bapu.
Thanks, you have rightly said it and I believe that Swachch Bharat and Swasth Bharat are supplementary to each other. In the health sector the nation has now moved ahead from the conventional approach. Earlier, every aspect regarding health used to be a responsibility of the Health Ministry alone. But now, all departments and ministries- be it the Sanitation Ministry or Ayush Ministry or Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Consumer Affairs Ministry or the Women & Child Welfare Ministry or even the State Governments- they are all working together for Swasth Bharat and stress is being laid on affordable health alongside preventive health. Preventive health care is the least costly and the easiest one as well. And, the more we become aware about preventive health care, the more beneficial will it be for the individuals, the family and the society. The first necessity for a healthy life is cleanliness. All of us took up the responsibility and the result is that in the last four years or so, sanitation coverage has almost doubled and risen to around 80 percent. Also, extensive work is going on to set up Health Wellness Centres across the country. Yoga has attained worldwide recognition as a measure of preventive health care. Yoga is a guarantee of both fitness and wellness. It is the result of our concerted efforts and commitment that Yoga has now become a mass movement and reached every house. Less than a hundred days are now left for the International Yoga Day on 21st June. On the previous three International Yoga Days, people in our country and people all over the world participated with great zeal and enthusiasm. This time too, we need to ensure that we do yoga ourselves and motivate our family, friends and all others from now itself to do yoga. Yoga has to be made popular among the youth, the senior citizens, men and women from all age groups through interesting ways. Usually, the country’s Television and electronic media do a variety of programmes on Yoga the whole year. Can we, beginning now, till the Yoga Day, devise a campaign to spread awareness on Yoga?
My dear countrymen, I am not a Yoga teacher. But yes, I surely am a Yoga practitioner and yet some people, through their creativity, have made me a Yoga teacher as well and 3-D animated videos of my yoga practice sessions have been prepared. I will share these videos with you so that we may do aasans and pranayam together. Efforts are being extensively undertaken to make health care accessible and affordable, make it easily accessible and affordable for the common man. Presently, more than three thousand Jan Aushadhi Kendras have been opened across the country and more than eight hundred medicines are being made available there at an affordable price. More such centres are being opened. I appeal to the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to provide this information about Jan Anshadhi Kendras to the needy ones – it will cut their expense on medicines. This will be a big help to them. The cost of heart stent for heart patients has been reduced to 85%. Knee implants cost has also been regulated and reduced by 50% to 70%. Under ‘Ayushman Bharat Yojana ‘, the Government of India and insurance companies will jointly provide 5 lakh repees for treatment to about 10 crore families or say 50 crore citizens per year. In the present 479 medical colleges, MBBS seats have been increased to about 68 thousand. New AIIMS are being opened in various states with a view to providing better treatment and health facilities to people across the country. One new medical college will be set up for every three districts. A target has been fixed to make the country TB-free by 2025. This is an enormous task. Your cooperation is needed to create public awareness. All of us will need to make united efforts to become TB-free.
My dear countrymen, April 14 is the birth anniversary of Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar. Years ago, Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar spoke of India’s industrialization. According to him the industry was an effective medium by which jobs could be made available to the poorest of the poor and the poorer. Today, the campaign of Make in India is progressing successfully in consonance with Dr. Ambedkarji’s dream of India as an industrial super power-that vision of his has become our inspiration today.
Today India has emerged as a bright spot in the global economy and today the highest foreign direct investment or FDI in the world, is flowing to India. The whole world is looking at India as a hub for investment innovation and development. That the development of industries could only be possible in the cities, was the kernel of the idea of Dr. Baba Sahib Ambedkar and that was the reason he banked upon urbanization of India. In continuance with his vision, smart city mission and urban missionwere kick-started in the country so that all kinds of amenities whether good roads, water supply, health facilities, Education or digital connectivity are available in the big cities and small towns of the country.Baba Saheb had strong faith in self-reliance. He did not want anybody to languish in poverty forever. He also believed that poverty cannot be ameliorated by mere distribution of capital among the impoverished. Today our monetary policy, Start Up India, Stand Up India initiative have become seedbed for our young innovators and young entrepreneurs. In the 30s and 40s when only roads and railways were being talked about in India, Baba Saheb Ambedkar mentioned about ports and waterways.It was Dr. Baba Saheb who envisaged water power as ‘nation power’. He stressed the utilization of water for the development of the nation The genesis of different river valley authorities, different water related commissions – all these were possible due to the vision of Baba Saheb Ambedkar. Today there are landmark efforts,  being embarked upon for waterways and ports in our country. New seaports are being constructed on a number of seaways of India and infrastructure is being strengthened at old ports.
In the era of 40s, while most of the discussions were centred around the Second World War, the looming Cold war and the partition –it was during those times Dr. Ambedkar had laid the foundation of Team India’s spirit in a way. He had talked about the importance of federalism, federal system and stressed on Center and states working together for the upliftment of the country. Today, we have adopted in all aspects of governance the mantra of co-operative federalism and going a step further, we have adopted competitive cooperative federalism but most importantly, Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar is an inspiration for millions of people like me, who belong to backward classes.
He showed us that to succeed it is not necessary for the person to be born in an illustrious or rich family, but even those who are born to poor families in India can also dare to dream their dreams and realize those dreams by achieving success. And of course, this is exactly what happened as many people mocked Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar, tried to pull him back and made every possible effort to ensure that the son of an impoverished and backward family would not progress in life, be something and succeed in life. But, the picture of New India is altogether different.
It is an India which is Ambedkar’s India, of the poor and the backward. On the occasion of the birth anniversary of Dr. Ambedkar from April 14 to May 5 ‘Gram-Swaraj Abhiyan,’ is being organized. Under the aegis of this campaign, separate programmes on village development, poverty amelioration and social justice will be held throughout India. I urge you all to be a part of this campaign.
My dear countrymen, a spectrum of many festivals would dawn upon us in the next few days- Bhagwan Mahavir Jayanti, Hanuman Jayanti, Easter and the Baisakhi. The day of Bhagwan Mahavir’s birth anniversary is a day to remember his sacrifice and penance.
The life and philosophy of Lord Mahavirji, the apostle of non-violence will inspire us all. I extend felicitations to all on the occasion of Mahavir Jayanti. The very mention of Easter reminds us of the inspirational preaching of Lord Jesus Christ which has always impressed on mankind the message of peace, harmony, justice, mercy and compassion. Vaisakhi will be celebrated in Punjab and in parts of western India in April; simultaneously, the twin festive connects of Jud -Sheetal and Satuwain in Bihar, and Poila Vaisakh in West Bengal will envelop everyone with joy and delight. All of these festivals are connected in one way or another to our fields and granaries, and through these festivals, we thank nature for the priceless gifts we receive as produce. Once again, my best wishes to you all on the occasion of the festivals coming our way. Many many thanks.


42. APRIL 29, 2018
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Just a while ago, from the 4th of April to the 15th of April, the 21st Commonwealth Games were held in Australia. 71 countries, including India, participated therein. With an event of such scale & magnitude, which saw the participation of thousands of sportspersons from myriad corners of the world, can you imagine the mood that must have pervaded the atmosphere there? An air of excitement, zeal, enthusiasm, hope, aspirations, the determination to achieve – who would want to stay away from an atmosphere like that? These were the times when people all over the country pondered eagerly everyday on the line-up of sportspersons, scheduled for their respective performances. How will India’s performance be, what will our medal tally look like? These questions were but natural. Our sportspersons too lived up to the countrymen’s expectations and displayed stellar performances, winning one medal after another. Shooting or Wrestling, Table Tennis or Badminton, it was a record performance for India. 26 Gold, 20 Silver, 20 Bronze, India bagged a tally of around 66 medals. This success makes every Indian swell with pride. Of course, winning medals is a moment of joy & glory for a sportsperson; it is equally so as a festival of laurels for the country & her countrymen. After the conclusion of a match, representing India, when the athletes draped in the tricolor rise, displaying their medals, the notes of the National Anthem being played evoke a sense of joy and fulfillment, glory and honour. This is very, very special in itself. It is a touching moment that fills one’s heart with thrill; it is a moment full of zest & warmth. It is a wave of emotions that engulfs all of us simultaneously. Perhaps, to express those sentiments I’ll run short of words. But I want to share with you what I heard from these heroes. I feel immensely proud; you too will feel so.
India’s performance in the Commonwealth Games was par excellence. At the same time, it was special. Special in the sense that this time there were many pathbreaking ‘firsts’. Are you aware that out of the wrestlers who represented India, each one of them returned with a medal? Manika Batra won a medal in each of the events that she competed in. She is the first Indian woman to win a gold in the individual table tennis category too. India clinched the maximum number of medals in shooting. Deepak Lather of Haryana became the youngest Indian Weight-Lifter to win a medal at Commonwealth games. 15 year old Indian shooter Anish Bhanwala became the youngest sportsperson to win a gold for India. Sachin Chowdhary is the sole Indian Para Power Lifter to win a medal at the Commonwealth Games.
This edition of the games was special on one more count- a majority of the medalists was women athletes. In squash, boxing, weightlifting and shooting – the performance of women turned out to be par excellence. The final contest in Badminton took place between two Indian Shuttlers, Saina Nehwal and P.V. Sindhu. Everyone was thrilled for the fact that despite there being competition, the ultimate medal winner had to be India. The whole country watched it with abated breath. I too enjoyed watching the match. This year, India fared well in Athletics too. Indian sprinters Mohammad Anas & Hema Das missed a medal narrowly, but their record performance has brought glory to the nation. I congratulate them too… my best wishes to them. Athletes who participated in these games hail from various parts of the country, even from smaller towns. They have reached this pinnacle, crossing a great deal of hurdles and hardships. Today, the positions they have secured for themselves, the targets they have achieved, owes a lot to the efforts & contribution of their parents, guardians, coaches, support staff, schools, teachers, the atmosphere provided by their Schools, during this journey in their lives. Even their friends have contributed by boosting their morale under all circumstances. I also congratulate them along with the sportspersons, my good wishes to them. I feel all these athletes have brought laurels to the country with their stellar performances; the fact is, their performances are not mere displays… they are sources of encouragement for upcoming Sportspersons and the young generation of the country alike.
Last month during ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I had urged our countrymen, especially the youth to espouse ‘Fit India’. I had invited everyone to join ‘Fit India’, lead ‘Fit India’. I was overjoyed to see people getting connected to it with a lot of enthusiasm. Expressing support for this, many people have written to me, sent me letters, shared ‘fitness mantra- Fit India’ stories on social media.
A gentleman Shriman Shashikant Bhonsale, sharing his photo by the swimming pool, has written, ‘My weapon is my body, my element is water, my world is swimming’.
Rooma Devnath writes, “I truly feel happy & healthy through my Morning Walks. She further adds,” For me, fitness comes with a smile and we should smile, when we are happy.
Devnathji, indeed, happiness is fitness, and there’s no doubt about it.
Dhawal Prajapati, sharing a photograph of himself trekking, has written; ‘For me, travelling & trekking is ‘Fit India’.
It was heartening to see many eminent personalities encouraging our youth in interesting ways for Fit India. Cine artiste Akshay Kumar has shared a video on Twitter. Even I have gone through it, you too should view it- it shows him exercising with wooden beads. He has mentioned that this exercise benefits muscles of the back and the stomach, to a great extent. Another video of his has gained popularity; in this he’s trying his hand on the volleyball with others. Many other young people have shared their experiences, having joined the ‘Fit India’ efforts. I feel movements like these are beneficial for all of us, for the entire country. I would additionally like to mention, that the movement of ‘Fit India’, without any expense, is called ‘YOG’. Yog has a special significance in the ‘Fit India’ campaign. You too must be busy with preparations… the significance, the merit of 21st June, International Yog Day has been accepted & welcomed globally. Do begin preparing for the Day rightaway. And not just yourself- your city, village, neighbourhood, school, college, men, women, everyone should make an attempt to connect with yog. Nowadays, the benefits of yog in one’s holistic physical & mental development does not need to be told… neither in India nor elsewhere in the world. You must have viewed an animated video depicting me, that has been widely circulated. I congratulate those from the field of animation for highlighting nuances, just the way a teacher does. You too will benefit from it.
My young friends, you now must be out of the tread mill of exams, exams & more exams; you must be wondering about spending your holidays. You must be contemplating on ways to enjoy your vacations and places to travel to! I would like to talk to you today, to invite you on a new task. I’ve seen a lot of young people these days, spending time in learning new things. The significance of Summer Internship is soaring; as it is, an altogether new experience in itself. One gets an opportunity to experience life anew, away from closeted walls, away from paper & pen and computers. Dear young friends, today I urge you to undergo a special internship. Three Ministries of the Government of India; maybe four- Sports, HRD, Department of Drinking water have come together to launch a ‘Swachch Bharat Summer Internship 2018’. College students, young people from the NCC and Nehru Yuva Kendra, whoever want to do something substantial & learn something for the sake of society, & the country, those who want to get connected with transforming the country and be a reason for it, those who want to do something or the other for society with a positive energy- for them, there is a great opportunity! Even the cause of the cleanliness campaign will get a boost, and when we celebrate the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, we’ll surely attain a sense of fulfillment. And let me tell you, the best out of the best interns who have strived in schools & colleges with excellent work will be rewarded with recognition at the national level. Not just that, those interns who accomplish their tasks well, will be awarded two credit points each, by the UGC. Once again, I invite students & young people, boys & girls to avail of the benefits of the internship. You can register yourselves for the ‘Swachch Bharat Summer Internship’ on Mygov. I hope our youth will lend a hand in taking this movement of cleanliness forward. I too am eager to know more about your efforts. Do send in your learning experience, do post your stories, photos and videos. Come. Let us turn this vacation into a learning opportunity, for a totally new experience.
My dear countrymen! I try to watch “Good News India” programme on Doordarshan whenever I get a chance and I would appeal to my countrymen that we all should also watch this “Good News India” programme wherein we get to know as to how many people in various parts of our country are doing many good things and that such good things are happening.
Recently, I saw that they were presenting the story of some youth from Delhi who are selflessly working in a dedicated manner to help in educating the poor children. This group of youngsters has started a big campaign in Delhi for providing education to the street children and slum dwellers. Initially, shocked to see the condition of children begging around or doing some menial jobs that this group of youngsters got dedicatedly, selflessly involved into this creative mission. Starting with just 15 children from the slums near Geeta Colony in New Delhi it is now being run at 12 places and two thousand children have been brought under its fold. Young teachers associated with this campaign find out a free time of two hours from their busy schedule and contribute in this stupendous mission of bringing out a social transformation.
Dear brothers and sisters, in this very way, some farmers from hilly areas of Uttarakhand have become a source of inspiration for the farmers across the country. With their collective efforts, they have not only changed their own fortunes but have changed fortunes of the whole region. In Bageshwar in Uttarakhand, main crops sown are Mandwa, Chaulai, Corn or Barley. This being a hilly area, the farmers did not get a fair price of their produce. But, the farmers in Kapkot tehsil decided to come out of this situation and adopted a value- addition process and changed the loss incurring equation into a profit-earning one. What they did was that they started production of biscuits from their agricultural produce and sold those biscuits directly in the market. Consequently, Chaulai which the farmers were forced to sell at Rs. 25 per Kg was now selling at Rs. 50 per Kg as biscuits.
Besides, there is a strong belief that the land in this area is iron-rich and these iron rich biscuits are very good for pregnant women as they overcome the deficiency of iron. These farmers have formed a cooperative society in Munar village and set-up a biscuit factory there. Impressed by the bold initiative of these farmers, the administration has also linked this to the National Livelihood Mission. These biscuits are now being supplied upto Almora and Kousani besides being sold to about fifty Aanganwadi kendras in Bagheshwar district. With the hard work of these farmers, the annual turnover of the society has gone up from 10 to 15 lakh rupees and with more than 900 families getting employment here, people have stopped migrating to other places.
My dear countrymen, we often hear that in, times to come, the world will face a war because of water. Everyone talks about this but do we not have any responsibility towards conservation of water? Do we not feel that water conservation must be a social responsibility? This must be a collective responsibility. How can we conserve each single drop of rain water? And, we all know this. And, water conservation is not a new topic for us; it is neither a part of the academic curriculum nor a part of our languages. Our forefathers have lived this as a way of life for centuries together. They gave due priority and importance to each single drop of water. They found out newer methods in order to conserve every single drop of water. Those of you who might be getting a chance to visit Tamilnadu might have noticed that in some temples in the state, there are carvings on stone depicting irrigation system, water conservation methods and drought management. There are vast stone inscriptions in these temples and devotees get a chance to read these educative messages. May it be Mannarkovil, Chiran Mahadevi, Kovilpatti or Pudukottai – you will get to see massive stone inscriptions to this effect. Several baodis (stepwells) are famous as tourist spots but please do not forget that these are the living symbols of the water conservation campaigns which our forefathers had accomplished.
Adalaj and Patan Ki Raniki Vaav (Baodi) in Gujarat is a UNESCO World Heritage site and its grandeur is to be seen to be believed. Baodis are water temples in a way. If you happen to go to Rajasthan, you must visit Chand Baodi. This is one of the biggest and the most beautiful baodis of India and the point to be noted is that this is situated in a water-scarce area. April, May, June and July is the most suitable time when rain water harvesting can be done and if we make preparations in advance, we can reap a rich harvest. Budget under MNREGA is also utilized for this water conservation activity. During the last three years, everyone in his or her own way has contributed towards water conservation and water management. An average of 32,000 crore rupees have been spent besides the MNREGA budget each year on water conservation and water management. If we talk of 2017-18, 55 percent of the total outlay of Rupees 64 thousand crores, which comes to around rupees 35 thousand crores, has been spent on works like water conservation. In last three years, nearly 150 lakh hectares of land got more benefit through water conservation and water management measures. Some people have really benefitted very well from MNREGA budget provisions made by the Government of India for water conservation and water management works. A project of reviving the rivers which had dried out was undertaken in Kerala. Seven thousand workers under MNREGA worked very hard for seventy days and finally succeeded in reviving Kuttumperoor river there. The Ganges and the Yamuna have plentiful of water but there are many other places in Uttar Pradesh like Fatehpur district where two small rivers namely Sasur-Khaderi got dried out. After receiving the reports of Remote Sensing Imagery and Inter Department Coordination, the district administration took up the responsibility of soil and water conservation on a massive scale. They succeeded in reviving the dried out Sasur Khaderi river with the help and cooperation of people from 40-45 villages of the area. This grand achievement is a big boon for animals, birds, farmers, crops and villages. I emphasis that once again April, May, June and July are before us and we must also take up some responsibility for water harvesting and water conservation, we should also chalk out some schemes, we should also do and show something.
My dear countrymen! When “Mann Ki Baat” approaches I receive messages, letters and phone calls from all sides. Aayan Kumar Banerjee from Devi Tola village of North 24 Parganas in West Bengal in his comment on My Gov has written – “We celebrate Rabindra Jayanti every year but many people are not aware of the Nobel Laureate Rabindra Nath’s philosophy of living peacefully, aesthetically and with integrity. Kindly discuss this point in “Mann Ki Baat” programme so that more and more people may get to know about this.”
I thank Aayanji for drawing the attention of all listeners of “Mann Ki Baat” towards this point. Gurudev Tagore was a personality full of knowledge and intellect whose writings left an indelible mark on everyone. Rabindra Nath was a personality full of talent, a multi – directional personna but a teacher in his inner self can always be felt. He has written in Gitanjali – “ He, who has the knowledge has the responsibility to impart it to the students.”
I do not know Bangla but had the habit of rising early since my childhood and in Eastern India, radio broadcasts start early while in Western India these start a bit late. I have a faint memory that probably around 5:30 in the morning, Rabindra Sangeet used to be broadcast on radio and I had developed a habit to listen to Rabindra Sangeet on radio. And, whenever I got a chance to listen to poems like Anandloke and Aaguner, Poroshmoni, I used to feel as if my mind was being energised. You must also have been impressed by Rabindra Sangeet and his poems. I pay my respectful homage to Rabindra Nath Tagore.
My dear countrymen! Within a few days from now the holy month of Ramazan will dawn upon us. The month of Ramazan is celebrated with full reverence and respect throughout the world. The sociological and collective aspect of fasting is that when a person experiences hunger himself, he comes to realize the hunger of others. When he is thirsty, he realizes the thirst of others. This is an opportunity to remember the teachings of Prophet Muhammad-peace be upon him- and his message. It is our responsibility to follow the path of equality and brotherhood as morals from his life. Once a person asked the Prophet (peace be upon him): “Which is the best thing in Islam?” The Prophet Saab said, “feeding a poor and needy and meeting everyone cordially, whether you know him or not!”
Prophet Mohammad Sahib (peace be upon him) believed in twin principles of knowledge and compassion. He did not possess an iota of ego regarding himself. He preached that knowledge alone defeats ego. Prophet Mohammad Sahib(peace be upon him) believed that if you possessed anything more than your requirement, then donate it to the needy, thus donation or giving alms is important during Ramzan. People donate generously to the needy during this holy month. Prophet Muhammad Sahib believed that a person is rich because of his inherent spirituality, and not materialistic wealth. I wish all the citizens an auspicious month of Ramazan and I hope this opportunity will inspire people to follow the Prophet’s message of peace and goodwill.
My dear countrymen! Buddha Purnima is a special day for every Indian. We must be proud of the fact that India is the birthplace of Lord Buddha, the very synonym of power of compassion, service and sacrifice, who guided millions of people around the world. This Buddha Purnima reminds us of all of our obligation to emulate Lord Buddha’s teaching as well as, pledge ourselves to follow his footsteps. Lord Buddha was the fountainhead of egalitarianism, peace, harmony and brotherhood. These are human values, which are most desired in the world today. Baba Saheb Dr. Ambedkar stressed that Lord Buddha has been a great inspiration in his social philosophy. Baba Saheb had said –“My Social philosophy may be said to be enshrined in three words; liberty, equality and fraternity. My Philosophy has roots in religion and not in political science. I have derived them from the teaching of my master, The Buddha.”
Baba Saheb strengthened the oppressed, exploited, deprived and crores of people standing on the brink of marginalization via the Constitution of India. There cannot be a bigger example of compassion than this. This form of compassion was one of the greatest qualities of Lord Buddha for the alleviation of suffering of the people. The Buddhist monks used to travel to different countries carrying with them the rich ideals of Lord Buddha and this has been occurring throughout the ages. We have inherited the wisdom of Lord Buddha throughout Asia as part of our legacy.
It forges a link between us and many Asian countries like China, Japan, Korea, Thailand, Cambodia, and Myanmar where Buddhist traditions and his preaching are a part of their origins. And this is the very reason that we are developing Infrastructure for Buddhist Tourism, which is going to connect Southeast Asia with the important Buddhist sites of India. I am also very pleased that the Government of India is a partner in the restoration of many Buddhist temples which also includes the centuries old magnificent Anand Temple in Bagan in Myanmar. Today, when there is confrontation and human suffering prevalent everywhere in the world, Lord Buddha’s teachings show the way to rid hatred from the world with compassion. I wish people spread all over the world who revere Lord Buddha and believe in the principles of compassion- I wish all of them an auspicious Buddha Purnima.
I seek benediction from Lord Buddha for the entire world, so that we can fulfill our responsibility in building a peaceful and compassionate world based on his teachings. Today, as we remember Lord Buddha, you must have heard about the idols of laughing Buddha, it is said that laughing Buddha brings one good fortune, but very few people know that smiling Buddha is also associated with an important event in India’s defense history. Now you will be wondering what is the connection between smiling Buddha and India’s military might?
You must remember, 20 years ago today, on 11th May 1998, the Prime Minister of India, Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee had said while addressing the nation and his words filled the whole country with pride, courage and elation. The Indian diaspora was infused with new confidence. That day also was the day of Buddha Purnima. On May 11, 1998, at India’s western end a nuclear test was conducted in Pokhran, Rajasthan. It has been 20 years since Pokhranand this test was done on Buddha Purnima with the blessings of Lord Buddha. India’s test was not only successful but in a way, India had demonstrated its might in the field of science and technology. We can also say 11 May 1988 is engraved in the history of India as a demonstration of her military power.
Lord Buddha has shown the world- that the power of inner strength or that of the soul is necessary for peace. Similarly, when you are sturdy as a nation, you can be at peace with others. The month of May, 1998 is not just important for the country from the aspect that nuclear tests were conducted this very month, but the manner in which they were carried out is also important. It has revealed to the entire world that India is the land of great scientists and with a strong leadership, India can reach loftier destinations and earn new laurels. On that day, Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee ji had given the mantra – “Jai-Jawan Jai-Kisan, Jai-Vigyan.’
Now that when we are going to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the Pokhran test conducted on May 11, 1998, I ask the younger generations of our nation to imbibe the mantra of ‘Jai-Vigyan’ given by Atalji for enhancing the might and the power of India, to build a modern India, a powerful India and a self-reliant India. Synergize your energy with the strength of India. Witnessing the journey that Atal ji started, we while continuing onwards on that very path with a renewed joy will derive great satisfaction in getting ahead.
My dear countrymen, looking forward to our conversation when we will meet for another episode of Mann Ki Baat.
Thank you very much.


43. MAY 27, 2018
Namaskar. Through ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I once again have been blessed with the opportunity to be face-to-face with you. I am sure you distinctly remember that for the last many months, a naval team comprising six women Commanders was on a voyage. I want to tell you something about the ‘Naavika Saagar Parikrama’. These six illustrious daughters of India circumnavigated the globe for over more than 250 days on board the INSV Tarini, returning home on the 21st of May. The entire country welcomed them with open arms, with high spirits. They traversed a multitude of oceans, many a sea, over a distance of almost twenty two thousand nautical miles. This was a first of its kind event in the entire world. Last Wednesday, I got an opportunity to meet these daughters and listen to their experiences. Once again, I congratulate these daughters and their spirit of adventure for bringing laurels to the country, for raising the glory of the Navy and significantly so, for conveying to the world that India’s daughters are no less. Who does not know of the sense of adventure? If you view the journey of human evolution, you will notice that breakthroughs in progress have taken birth in the womb of some adventure or the other. There is an umbilical link between development and adventure; the resolve to achieve something, the burning desire to do something unparalleled, the sentiment proclaiming “I too can do it”. The number of such people may be miniscule, but they turn out to be sources of inspiration for millions of others, spanning an array of eras. Recently, you must have come across quite a few notable happenings pertaining to mountaineers attempting to scale Mount Everest. For centuries, Everest has been throwing the gauntlet at humankind. And for long, brave hearts have been responding to the challenge.
On the 16th of May, a team comprising five tribal students of an Ashram School in Chandrapur, Maharashtra- Maneesha Dhurve, Pramesh Ale, Umakant Madhavi, Kavidas Katmode and Vikas Soyam- scaled the world’s highest peak. These Ashram School students began training in August, 2017, covering Wardha, Hyderabad, Darjeeling and Leh-Ladakh. These young boys & girls had been selected under ‘Mission Shaurya’. True to its name, they brought glory to the country with their brave deed of conquering the Everest. I congratulate these young friends and members of the school in Chandrapur, from the core of my heart. Just a while ago, 16 year old Shivangi Pathak became the youngest Indian woman to scale Everest from the Nepal side. Heartiest congratulations, Beti Shivangi.
Ajit Bajaj and his daughter became the first ever father-daughter duo to ascend Everest. And it’s not that only the young are climbing Everest. On the 19th of May, Sangeeta Bahal, aged more than 50, scaled the Everest. There are some mountaineers who have shown that apart from possessing skills, they are sensitive too.
A few days ago, under the ‘Clean Ganga Campaign’, a group from the BSF Scaled the Everest and while returning, removed loads of trash littered there and brought it down. This deed is commendable indeed; it also displays their commitment towards cleanliness and the environment. People have been ascending the Everest for years & many have managed to reach the peak successfully. I congratulate these daredevils, especially the daughters from the core of my heart.
My dear countrymen, especially my young friends, just a couple of months ago, when I mentioned ‘Fit India’, I did not think it would draw such a good response; that a large number of people would come forward to support it. When I say ‘Fit India’, I believe that the more we play, the more we will inspire the country to come out & play. People are sharing videos of Fitness Challenge on social media; they are tagging each other to spread the challenge. Everybody is now getting connected with this Fit India Campaign. People from the film fraternity, from the world of Sports, common citizens of the country, members of the armed forces, school teachers or even those toiling in fields and farms, their rising notes are building up a crescendo ‘Hum Fit toh India Fit’… ‘If we are fit, India is fit’. For me, it’s heartwarming that the captain of the Indian Cricket team Virat Kohli ji has included me in his challenge… and I too have accepted his challenge. I believe this is gainful and this kind of a challenge will inspire us to be fit alongwith others, as well.
My dear countrymen, many a time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, you must have heard me mention a thing or two about sports & sportspersons. And in the last episode, our heroes of the Commonwealth Games shared with us their ‘Mann Ki Baat’, matters close to their hearts through this programme.
Chhavi Yadav ji, thank you very much for your phone call. It is true that sports & games that were once a part & parcel of every child’s life, in every lane in the neighbourhood, are fading into oblivion. These games used to be a special feature of summer holidays. Sometimes in scorching afternoons; at times after dinner, children used to play with exuberant abandon for hours together, leaving all worries behind. Some games saw the participation of the whole family. Aiming the ball at the crooked column of stone slats- Pitthoo, playing marbles, testing one’s agility in Kho kho, spinning the top, Lattoo, or applying skills in swiftly flicking the tapered- edged wooden peg and hitting it aloft-Gilli-Danda, innumerable games were an inseparable part of each & every child’s life from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, from Kutch to Kamrup. Of course, those games were known by different names, depending on the place. Pitthoo is one such game. Some called it Lagori, at other places it was Satoriya, Saat Pathar, Dikori, Satodiya… one game with many names! Traditional sports and games comprise both varieties… outdoor and indoor as well. The unity, intrinsic to our country’s diversity can be witnessed in these games. A single game is known by distinct names at different places. I am from Gujarat. I known of a game played in Gujarat called Chomal Isto. It is played with cowries or tamarind seeds or dice on an eight by eight square board. It used to be played in almost every state. Known as Chowkabara in Karnataka, Attoo in Madhya Pradesh, Pakidakaali in Kerala, Champal in Maharashtra, Daayaam and Thaayaam in Tamilnadu, Changaa Po in Rajasthan, it had innumerable names. One realizes after playing, despite not knowing the language of a particular state, “Oh! We used to play this game in our state as well!” Who amongst us would not have enjoyed playing Gilli-Danda in our childhood? This is a game that is played across villages and cities. It is also known by different names. In Andhra Pradesh it is called Gotibilla or Karrabilla.In Odisha it’s called Gulibadi and in Maharashtra, Vittidaaloo. Some games are seasonal. There is a season for flying kites. While flying a kite or playing a game, one freely expresses one’s inherent unique qualities. You must have seen many a child, shy by nature, leap up with zest, the moment a game begins. Even children with a seemingly serious countenance start expressing themselves; while playing, the innate child within them comes to the fore. Traditional sports and games are structured in such a manner that along with physical ability, they enhance our logical thinking, concentration, alertness and energy levels. Games are not just games; they teach us values in life, such as, setting targets, building up determination, developing team spirit and fostering mutual co-operation. I recently noticed in a training programme in Business Management, our traditional sports and games being used for improving overall personality development and interpersonal skills. These games are proving to be handy in overall development. And then, there is no prescribed age limit for participating in them. From tiny tots to Grandfather-Grandmother, when we all play these games together then the term ‘Generation Gap’ disappears on its own. At the same time, we also come to know about our culture and traditions. Many games also make us aware about our society, environment and other spheres.
It is a matter of concern, whether these sports & games will fade away to the point of extinction. It will not just be a loss of a game; it will be the loss of the spirit of childhood, something that will exist only in the verses of poetry.
Ye daulat bhi le lo
Ye shohrat bhi le lo
Bhale chheen lo mujhse meri jawani
Magar mujhko lauta do bachpan ka sawan
Wo kagaz ki kashti, wo baarish ka paani
 
Take away all my riches
Bereave me of all this fame
Snuff out my youth if you so wish
But do return the monsoon that drenched me as a child
The puddles & my paper boats, the magic of my rains.
And we will be forever reduced to listening to this song, hence we must keep our traditional sports alive.It is crucial that today schools, neighbourhoods and youth congregations should come forward and promote these games. Through crowd sourcing we can create a very large archive of our traditional games. The Videos of these games can be shot, outlining the way to play these games along with the mandatory rules and regulations.Animation films can also be made so that our young generations for whom these games played in our streets are something to marvel about, can see, play for themselves and thus bloom.
My dear countrymen, on the 5th of June, our nation, India will officially host the World Environment Day Celebrations. This is a very important achievement for India and it is also an acknowledgement as well as recognition of India’s growing leadership in the direction of tackling climate change.
This time the theme is ‘Beat Plastic Pollution’. I appeal to all of you, that while trying to understand the importance of this theme, we should all ensure that we do not use low grade polythene and low grade plastics and try to curb the negative impact of plastic pollution on our environment, on our wild life and our health. Let us all visit the World Environment Day website ‘wed-india 2018’ and try to imbibe and inculcate the many interesting suggestions given there into our everyday life.
Whenever we face a torrid summer, or floods, incessant rains or unbearable cold, everybody becomes an expert, analyzing global warming and climate change. But does empty talk bring about any solutions? Being sensitive towards nature, protecting nature, should come naturally to us; these virtues should be embedded in our sanskar.
In the past few weeks, we all witnessed that there were dust storms in the different regions of the country, along with heavy winds and unseasonal heavy rains. There was also loss of life and property. These calamities are basically the result of the change in weather patterns. Our culture, our traditions have never taught us to be at loggerheads with nature.
We have to live in harmony and in synchronicity with nature, we have to stay in touch with nature. Mahatma Gandhi had advocated this wisdom at every step of his life. Today when India speaks of climate justice or plays a major role in the Cop21 and Paris agreements or when we unite the whole world through the medium of International Solar Alliance, they all are rooted in fulfilling that very dream of Mahatma Gandhi.
On this environment day, let all of us give it a good thought as to what can we do to make our planet cleaner and greener? How can we progress in this direction? What innovative things can we do? The rainy season is fast approaching; we can set a target of achieving record plantation of trees this time and not only plant trees but also nurture and maintain the saplings till they grow.
My dear countrymen and especially my young friends, you do remember the 21stof June now;not only you and I, June 21stremains a part of the entire world’s collective consciousness. The 21stof June has been mandated and is celebrated as the International Yoga Day in the entire world and people start preparing for it months in advance. The news being received these days is that there are preparations afoot in the whole world to celebrate 21st June as International Yoga Day.
Yoga for unity and a harmonious society conveys a message that has permeated the world over. Centuries ago, the great Sanskrit Poet Bhartahari had written in his ‘Shataktrayam’.
 
धैर्यंयस्यपिताक्षमाचजननीशान्तिश्चिरंगेहिनी
सत्यंसूनुरयंदयाचभगिनीभ्रातामनःसंयमः।
शय्याभूमितलंदिशोSपिवसनंज्ञानामृतंभोजनं
एतेयस्यकुटिम्बिनःवदसखेकस्माद्भयंयोगिनः।।
[A man whose father is patience, mother is forgiveness and peace as consort, Truth as his friend, compassion as his sister and restraint for brother as family members and whose bed is the great earth, is clothed by the great sky and whose food is only knowledge. Is indeed a Yogi who won’t know any fear.]
Thisobservation expressed centuries ago, straightaway implies that practicing yogic exercises on a regular basis leads to imbibing benefic attributes which stand by our side like relatives and friends. The practice of yoga leads to building up of courage, which always protects us like a father. The practice of yoga leads to germination of a sense of forgiveness in the same manner as a mother has for her children and mental peace becomes our permanent friend. Bhartahari has said that with regular yogic exercise, truth becomes our child, mercy becomes our sister, self restraint our brother, earth turns in to our bed and knowledge satiates our hunger. When so many attributes become one’s partner, then that yogi conquers all forms of fear. Once again, I appeal to all the citizens to adopt their legacy of yoga and create a healthy, happy and harmonious nation.
My dear countrymen, today is the 27thof May, the death anniversary of the first Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru ji. I render my pranam to Pandit ji. Memories of this month are also linked with Veer Savarkar. This was the very month, the month of May 1857, when Indians had displayed their strength against the British. In many parts of the country, our youth and farmers demonstrated their bravery whilst standing up against the injustice. It is indeed sad that we kept on calling the events of 1857 only as a rebellion or a soldiers’ mutiny for a very long time.
In fact, May 1857 was not only evaluated as a minor historical incident but was also an attempt to dent our self-respect. It was Veer Savarkar who boldly expostulated by writing that whatever happened in 1857 was not a revolt but was indeed the First War of Independence. Savarkaralong with his band of brave hearts celebrated the 50thanniversary of the First War of Independence with great fanfare at India house in London. It is also an amazing coincidence that the month which witnessed the First Struggle for Independence was the month in which Veer Savarkar ji was born. Savarkar ji’s personality was full of special qualities; he was a worshipper of both weapons or shashtra and Knowledge or shaashtras.
Generally Veer Savarkar is renowned for his bravery and his struggle against the British Raj. But besides these sterling qualities, he was also a striking poet and a social reformer who always emphasized on goodwill and unity. A wonderful account about Savarkarji has been given by our dear honorable Atal Bihari Vajpayee Ji. Atal ji had said – Savarkar means brilliance, Savarkar means sacrifice, Savarkar means penance, Savarkar means substance, Savarkar means logic, Savarkar means youth, Savarkar means an arrow, and Savarkar means a Sword! Behold! What an accurate depiction of Savarkar by Atal ji! Savarkar marched alongwith both poetry and revolution. Besides being a sensitive poet, he was also a courageous revolutionary.
My dear brothers and sisters, I was watching a story on TV about our underprivileged daughters of certain slums in Sikar, Rajasthan. Our daughters, who were forced to sift through garbage and beg from home to home in order to earn a living – today they are learning sewing and stitching clothes to cover the impoverished. This is an example where the daughters are stitching ordinary to good quality clothes for themselves and other families. Along with this, they are undergoing a training course in skill development.
These daughters have become self-reliant today and are living their lives with respect and have become a strong support to their families. I wish all these daughters, brimming with hope and trust, a very bright future. They have demonstrated that if you have the desire to do something and if you are determined towards that goal then success can be achieved despite all odds! And this is not only about Sikar, but in every corner of India, you will witness something akin to this. If you observe in your neighbourhood, then you will witness for yourselves how people overcome the difficulties in their lives!
You must have realized that whenever we go to a tea shop, and enjoy tea there, a discussion with some of the customers automatically ensues. These discussions are also political and social in nature, can be about movies, sports and sportspersons or can focus even on the problems of the country – any problem with probable solutions are discussed at length – but often the problems and their solutions  remain limited to such animated discussions only.
But there are some people who go ahead with their work, to bring about a change through their hard work and dedication; they make it a reality. Such is the story of D. Prakash Rao, living in the slums of Cuttack, Orissa, who gave up everything of his in order to adopt and realize the dreams of others!Just yesterday I’ve had the good fortune of meeting D. Prakash Rao.
Shriman D. Prakash Rao has been a tea vendor in the city of Cuttack forthe past five decades. A meagre tea vendor; today you will be surprised to know that the lives of more than 70 children are being illuminated through education due to his efforts. He has opened a school named ‘Asha Ashvaasan’, spending 50% of his incomefor children living in slums and hutments. He ensures education, health and meals for all the children coming to this school. I congratulate D. Prakash Rao for his hard work, his persistence and for providing a new direction to the lives of those poor children attending his school. He has banished the darkness from their lives.Who amongst us does not know the Vedic shloka ‘Tamso Ma Jyotirgamaya’! However, it has been put intopractice by D. Prakash Rao. His life is an inspiration to us, our society and the whole country. Your surroundings too must be full of such inspiring happenings. There must be innumerable incidents. Come, let us take positivity forward.
The month of June is so hot that people anxiously wait for the rains, gazing towards the sky for the clouds to appear. People will wait for the moon in a few days from now onwards.Witnessing the moon means that the festival of Eid can be celebrated. After an entire month of fasting during Ramzan, the festival of Eid is a harbinger of celebrations.
I hope and believe that everyone will celebrate Eid with gaiety and fervor and on this occasion children will specially get a grand ‘Eidi’. I hope that the festival of Eid will further strengthen the bonds of harmony in our society. Heartiest felicitations to all of you. My dear countrymen, many thanks to you all. We shall meet once again in another episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ next month.
Namaskar


44. JUNE 24, 2018
Namaskar. My dear countrymen, I’m fortunate once again to be face to face with you in the ‘Mann Ki Baat’ programme. Just a few days ago, a historic Cricket match took place in Bengaluru. Of course you must have realized that I am referring to the test match between India and Afghanistan. It was Afghanistan’s first international match and it’s a matter of honour for us that this historic match for Afghanistan was played with India. Both teams performed par excellence. Besides, bowler Rashid Khan had performed exceedingly well in the IPL earlier this year. I remember Afghanistan President Shriman Ashraf Ghani’s words on Twitter tagging me along “The people of Afghanistan are extremely, proud of our hero Rashid Khan. I’m also thankful to our Indian friends who created a platform for our players to showcase their skills”. Rashid represents what constitutes the best of Afghanistan. He is an asset to the world of cricket. Then he quipped “No, we are not giving him to anyone!” This match will remain etched in our memories for a long time. Anyway, being the first match, it is naturally memorable, but I will cherish it for a special reason. The Indian team did something that is exemplary to the whole world. What does a winning team do while receiving the trophy? The Indian team, while receiving the trophy, warmly invited the Afghanistan team which had played its first international match to pose together for photographs. This incident exemplifies the very spirit of sportsmanship. Sports is an excellent route to unite society and to showcase the talents & skills of our youth. I felicitate both the teams of India & Afghanistan. I sincerely hope, that in future too, we’ll play with each other with the best sportsman spirit & shine together.
My dear countrymen, this 21st of June, the fourth Yoga Day presented the rarest of sights. The whole world appeared as one entity. In the European Parliament in Brussels, at the UN headquarters in New York, on Japanese naval warships, there were sights of people performing yoga. Saudi Arabia witnessed its first, historic yoga programme and I am told many aasans were demonstrated by women. On the snow capped mountain peaks of Ladakh, Indian and Chinese soldiers performed yoga in unison. Yoga breaks all barriers of borders and unites people. Zealous citizens of hundreds of lands overlooked divisions of caste, religion, region, colour and gender to transform this occasion into a massive festival. If people from the entire world ardently participated in programmes on Yoga Day, why should India not feel elated many times over?
It is a matter of great pride for a hundred & twenty five crore people to witness members of our armed forces perform yoga on land, sea & sky. A section of our brave soldiers did yoga in submarines; some of them chose the snow clad mountainous terrain of Siachen for the same. Our air warriors astounded everyone by performing yogasans in mid sky, some 15 thousand feet above the earth. Spectacular was the fact that they achieved this feat not inside an airplane but while floating mid air. Schools, colleges, offices, parks, skyscrapers, playgrounds came alive- as yoga venues. Heartwarming was an instance in Ahmedabad. Around 750 divyang brothers and sisters assembled at one place to do yoga and thus created a world record.Yogahas broken barriers of caste, creed and geography to unite the people of the entire world, which is the very essence of the real sentiment innate to Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam that we have followed in letter and spirit over centuries. Our Rishis, sages and saints have laid emphasis on certain tenets; yoga has proved them in a concrete manner. I believe that the concept of wellness today is bringing about a revolution. I hope the campaign of wellness through yoga will gain further momentum. More and more people will come forward to make it a part of their lives.
My dear countrymen, many of you have urged me on My gov and Narendra Modi app to mention Doctor’s Day, the 1st of July. You are absolutely right. We think of doctors only during times of distress. But this is a day when the nation celebrates the achievements of our doctors and expresses gratitude for their spirit of service and commitment towards society. We are a people who, by nature, revere the Mother as the equivalent of god since she is the source of our very existence, our life. On the other hand, there are times when it is the Doctor who gives us re-birth. The role of a doctor is not limited to mere treatment of ailments. Often a doctor plays the role of a family friend, a lifestyle guide. They not only cure but also heal. Today, doctors possess not just medical expertise; they have a vast experience on the co- relation between general lifestyle trends and their effect on our health. Indian doctors have carved a niche for themselves in the entire world through their capabilities and skills. Our doctors have gained recognition for their expertise in the medical field, hardworking attitude and the ability to solve complex medical problems. Through Mann Ki Baat I extend my warmest felicitations on behalf of the countrymen to all our doctors, ahead of Doctor’s Day on the 1st of July.
My dear countrymen, as a people, we are truly blessed to be born in this land, bhoomi of Bharat, India. India has had a rich historical canvas. Every single month, every single day in fact, is a marker of one historical event or the other. Every place in India is replete with signposts of heritage. Every place has been blessed with a saint, a luminary or a great, famous personality who has contributed through his sagacity.
Thank you very much for your phone call. It is correct that I am reaching Maghar on the 28th. I am sure you know about Kabirwad in Gujarat when I used to work there, I had organized a National session of people belonging to the tradition of saint Kabir. Once again I have been blessed with the opportunity to visit this Samadhi sthal, this shrine. You must be aware that in eastern Uttar Pradesh, there is a place called Maghar. It is here that Sant Kabir Das ji attained Samadhi. Do you know why Kabir Das ji chose to go to Maghar? In those days it was believed that death in Maghar was a roadblock in one’s pathway to heaven.  On the contrary, breathing one’s last in Kaashi was a guarantee for entry into heaven. Maghar was considered unholy but Sant Kabirdas never subscribed to that view. He toiled relentlessly to quell many such superstitions and evil social customs of his times. That is why he went to Maghar and chose to attain Samadhi there. Sant Kabir Das ji, through his verses ‘Saakhis’ and ‘Dohas’ stressed upon the virtues of social equality, peace and brotherhood. These were his ideals. We can feel the essence of these ideals in his compositions. They are relevant & inspiring even in modern times. I quote a doha
 
कबीरसोईपीरहै, जोजानेपरपीर |
जोपरपीरनजानही , सोकापीरमेंपीर ||
 
The true saint is the one who recognizes & understands the sufferings of others. Those who do not feel the pain of others are insensitive, uncompassionate. Kabir Das ji laid great emphasis on social cohesion. He was a thinker way ahead of his times. In those days, when the whole world was undergoing strife and degradation of moral values, he spread the message of peace & harmony. He worked towards uniting the populace, bridging their differences.
“जगमेंबैरीकोईनहीं, जोमनशीतलहोय
यहआपातोडालदे, दयाकरेसबकोय”
There will be no enmity in the world if the inner being is at peace.
Compassion should be the universal way of life.
In another doha, Kabir has written.
जहांदयातहंधर्म, जहांलोभतहंपाप
जहांक्रोधतहंकालहै, जहांक्षमातहंआप
Compassion leads to righteousness,
Greed leads to sin.
Anger is sure to devour you,
Forgiveness is a great virtue.
He said
जातिनपूछोसाधूकी, पूछलिजियज्ञान
Never ask a saint his caste or creed;
Ask him about his repository of knowledge.
He appealed to the people to rise above divisions of religion & caste and make knowledge & wisdom the sole basis of recognition. His principles are relevant even after several centuries have gone by.Since we are referring to Sant Kabir Das ji, I am reminded of a doha couplet in which he says,
“गुरुगोविन्ददोऊखड़ेकाकेलागूंपांय|
बलिहारीगुरुआपने, गोविन्ददियोबताय“||
  Such is the exalted status accorded to the guru, the teacher. And one such guru is Jagatguru, Guru Nanak Dev. He showed the righteous path of life to millions, inspiring them for centuries. Guru Nanak Dev’s teachings endeavoured to eradicate caste based discrimination prevalent in society. He perceived humankind as one & urged everyone to embrace humanity.
Guru Nanak Devji said that the service to the poor and the needy is service to God. Wherever he went, he took many initiatives for the welfare of the society. The establishment of a kitchen free of social discrimination where a person of any caste, sect, religion or community could eat or what we know as the langarsystem was initiated solely by Guru Nanak Dev Ji. The 550th Prakash Parv of Guru Nanak Dev Ji will be celebrated in 2019. I want all of us to join this great festival with enthusiasm and fervour. To celebrate this festival in the entire Indian society and around the world I also urge you to suggest new ideas, new concepts, and innovations on which we can ponder and make preparations and thus we can also celebrate the Prakash parv as Prerna Parv with great pride .
My dear countrymen! The history of India’s struggle for independence is very long, very vast and is filled with countless sacrifices. There is another chapter of history associated with Punjab. In the year 2019, 100 years of the horrific incident of Jallianwala Bagh will come to a full circle, it was an incident that embarrassed the entire humanity. Who can forget that dark day of April 13, 1919, when abusing all limits of power, crossing all the boundaries of cruelty; theguiltless, unarmed and innocent people were fired upon. How can we remember the completion of 100 years of this horrific event is something we canall give a thought to, but we must also remember the everlasting message that this incident has imparted that is – violence and cruelty can never solve any problem. It is peace and non-violence, renunciation and martyrdom that are triumphant in the end!
My dear countrymen! Mr. Raman Kumar of Rohini, Delhi, has written on ‘Narendra Modi Mobile App’ that oncoming July 6 happens to be Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee’s birthday and he wants me to talk about Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee in this episode of Mann Ki Baat. Thank you very much, Raman ji. It feels great to see your interest in India’s history. You know, yesterdayjune 23, was the death anniversary of Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee. Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee was associated with many fields, but the areas which were closest to his heart were education, administration and parliamentary affairs, very few people would know that he was the youngest vice-chancellor of the University of Calcutta at merely 33 years of age.
Very few people would also be knowing that in 1937, on the invitation of Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore addressed the convocation in Kolkata University in Bangla. This was the first time under British rule that the convocation in Kolkata University had been addressed to in Bangla. From 1947 to 1950, Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee was the first Industries minister of India and, in a sense, helaid a strong foundation for India’s industrial development, he had prepared a solid base, it was he who had prepared a stout platform. The first industrial policy of Independent India, which came in 1948, was stamped with his ideas and vision. Dr. Mukherjee’s dream was for India to be industrially self-reliant, competent and prosperous in every sphere.
He had wanted India to develop heavy industries and also pay full attention to MSME, handloom, textiles and cottage industry. For the proper development of cottage and small industries with finance availability and organizational setup- All India Handicrafts Board, All India Handloom Board and Khadi & Village Industries Board were established between 1948 and 1950. There was also a special emphasis by Dr. Mukherjee on indigenization of India’s defence production, in the establishment of four most successful mega projects- Chittaranjan locomotive works factory, Hindustan aircraft factory, Sindri fertilizer factory and Damodar Valley Corporation and other river valley projects, Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee contributed significantly. He was very passionate about the development of West Bengal. It was the result of his understanding, prudence and activism that a part of Bengal could be saved and it is still a part of India.
For Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, the most important thing was the integrity and unity of India – and for this, at the young age of 52, he also sacrificed his life. Come! Let us forever remember Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee’s message of unity imbued with the spirit of goodwill and brotherhood and remain proactive with all our might for the progress of India.
My dear countrymen! During the past few weeks, I had the opportunity to interact with the beneficiaries of different schemes of government through video call. I got an opportunity to know beyond the confines of the files the changes which are being ushered in the lives of people directly from them. People spoke about their determination, their happiness and their achievements. I believe that this was not a mere governmental programme for me, but it was a unique learning experience and during this time the joy of seeing people’s faces lit with happiness, can be the moment of greatest satisfaction in anyone’s life? When I would listen to the stories of a common man, his guileless words narrating his experience would touch my heart.
In far-distant villages, daughters are providing services ranging from pension to issuance of passport to senior citizens through the aegis of common service centers. Asister from Chhattisgarh collects custard apple and does business by making its ice cream. Like Anjan Prakash in Jharkhand, many lakhs of young besides running the Yuva – Jan Aushidhi kendras in the country are providing affordable medicines in the nearby villages. At the same time a young man from West Bengal desperately seeking a job two to three years ago is now a successful entrepreneur ; And not only this he is providing employment to ten to fifteen people. Whereas young school students from Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Goa are working on an important topic like waste management in their school’s tinkering lab. I just do not know how many such stories were shared with me, there wasn’t a single corner of the country where people did not have a success story of theirs to share with me. I am glad that in this entire programme I witnessed the accomplishments of the common man more than the achievements of the government, of the country’s power, the power of New India’s dreams, the power of the resolve of the new India – this is what I experienced!
There are certain people in society, who find no solace till they do not express their frustrated views, their depressed views and seek ways to divide rather than unite. In such an environment, when the common man comes to you talking about emerging hope, new zeal and events that have taken place in his life, it is not to the government’s credit. An incident regarding a small girl from a remote village too can inspire the hundred and twenty five crore people. With the help of technology, through the video bridge even a single moment spentwith the beneficiaries was very enjoyable, very motivational and provided satisfaction to work more. There is a renewed joy in dedicating your life for the upliftment, and you’re left with renewed fervour and inspiration.
I am very grateful to the countrymen. 40-50 lakh people participated in this video bridge program and imparted me with a new strength. I again want to express my gratitude to you all.
My dear countrymen! I always feel that if we look around us, somewhere or something good always happens. Many good people out there are involved in beneficial work. We can also smell the fragrance of righteousness. In the past, one thing came to my attention and it happens to be a very unique combination. On one hand, where we have professionals and engineers, on the other hand, there exist farmers tilling the fields, our brethren-sisters associated with agriculture. Now you must be wondering that these are two completely different occupations – what is the relation between these professions? But there exists a link, in Bangalore, corporate professionals and IT engineers came along and created an effortless ‘Samridhi trust’ with which they have doubled the income of the farmers by successful activation of this trust. This trust remained associated with farmers, drew plans and made successful efforts to increase the income of farmers. The training to inculcate organic farming while teaching latest agricultural techniques and how to grow more crops along with a single cash crop in the fields was imparted through the professional, engineers and technocrats associated with this trust started giving training to the farmers. The farmers who initially used to depend on the same single cash crop in their fields and that too the yield was also not good begetting lesser profits, today are not only growing vegetables but also marketing their own vegetables and getting good prices through the trust. Farmers producing grains have also become associated with this trust.
On one hand, farmers have a major role in the entire chain from cultivation till the marketing of crops, whereas on the other hand, to make certain the farmers’ participation in reaping profits is an attempt to guarantee their right. A separate seed bank has been created to make good agricultural strains available for reaping a bumper harvest. Women have also been added in this activity and they supervise the work of this seed-bank. I congratulate these young people for this innovative experiment and I am happy that these young professionals, technocrats and others associated with the world of  engineering, got out of their comfort zone to make a connect with the farmer, the village, fields and barns.
Friends! Your youth-power is really inspiring for any young person. Many other young people of our country will definitely visit your website and look closely at your work and will also be inspired by how they can be of use in different areas of the social milieu in their area. I once again felicitate the youth of my country for their innovative experiments, some of which I might have got to know, some might have escaped me, some people might or may not be aware of but nonetheless I wish countless people involved in doing beneficial work ,very good luck from my side.
My dear countrymen! It’s been an year when GST was implemented. ‘One Nation, One Tax’ was the dream of the people of this country that has become a reality today. If I’ve to give credit to anyone for successful implementation of ‘One Nation One Tax reform’, then I credit the states of our nation. GST is a great example of Cooperative federalism, where all the states decided to take a unanimous decision in the interest of the nation, and then such a huge tax reform could be implemented in the country. So far, there have been 27 meetings of the GST Council and we can all feel proud that people from different political ideologies have been involved in these meetings. These meetings involve representatives of different states; states which have different priorities, but in spite of all this, all the decisions that have been taken in the GST Council so far have been taken with absolute consensus. Before the onset of GST scheme, there were 17 different types of taxes prevailing in the country, but now only one tax is applicable in the entire country. GST is not only the victory of integrity but it is also a celebration of honesty. Earlier, in the case of taxation and allied affairs in the country, there were rampant complaints of Inspector Raj.
In the GST scheme,information technology has replaced the inspector. Everything from return to refund is done through online information technology. The check post has become extinct after the arrival of the GST scheme and the movement of goods has become faster, which not only saves time but is also accruing benefits in the areaof logistics. GST is probably be the biggest tax reform in the world. The successful implementation of such a huge tax reform in India was successful only because the people of the country adopted it and through the power of the masses, fuelled the success of the GST scheme. It is generally believed that such a big tax reform, in a huge country like ours with such a large population takes 5 to 7 years for effective adoption. However within a year, the enthusiasm of the honest people of this nation, the celebration of integrity in the country and the participation of people resulted in this new tax system managing to create a space for itself, has achieved stability and according to the need, it will bring reform through its inbuilt arrangement. This is a huge success in itself which 125 crore Indians have earned for themselves.
My dear countrymen! Once again, while concluding this episode, I wait most eagerly for the next chapter of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, of meeting you and talking to you. I wish you many felicitations.
Thank you very much.


45. JULY 29, 2018
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Of late, News of abundant rainfall has been steadily coming in. At places, we are hearing of rising concerns on account of excessive showers; at some places, people are anxiously waiting for the rains to begin. The vastness and diversity of India, in fact, at times even rains play hide & seek through partiality laced likes & dislikes. But why should we blame the rains! After all it was humankind that chose the path of conflict with Nature and consequently earnt her periodic wrath. And that is why it becomes our collective responsibility… Let us be lovers of nature, protectors of Nature, conservers of Nature… and thus, ensure spontaneous balance in her myriad bounty.
Come to think of it, recently an incident pertaining to a natural disaster attracted global attention, leaving every heart & mind perturbed. All of you must have watched it on T.V… in Thailand a team of 12 teenaged football players and their coach went on an excursion to a cave. Usually it takes a few hours to enter and exit that cave. But destiny had different plans that day. Barely had they entered deep into the cave that a sudden heavy downpour caused water logging at the inlet of the cave. Their exit was completely blocked. Not able to find a way out, they perched themselves a top a mound inside the cave; not for a day or two, but an entire 18 days. One can only imagine the predicament of these teenagers in the face of death, where every second was fraught with danger.  On the one hand they were struggling against all odds; on the other, the world over, humanity joined hands in expressing the noblest & the most righteous of human virtues. The world over, people prayed for the safe & secure exit of these children. No stone was left unturned to trace their where abouts, their well-being and their rescue. Their timely evacuation was of a prime concern, since the heavy monsoon would have delayed rescue-attempts by a few months. Anyway, the good news of their safe exit spread a sigh of relief, a sense of inner calm. But I feel like viewing the entire sequence of events from another perspective, i.e, how the operation was conducted! The sense of responsibility & commitment, prevailing at every level was astonishing. The government, their parents, family members, media, citizens of that country, each one of them displayed an awe-inspiring sense of peace and patience. All of them came together as a team to accomplish their mission. I feel the self-control exercised by each one of them in conduct is worth understanding and emulating. It is not that the parents were not aggrieved, it is not that the mothers’ eyes had ceased to be moist. Their patience, their restraint, in fact the calm composure exercised by the entire society is commendable & worth following. During the operation, a sailor from Thailand Navy sacrificed his life. The whole world is be wildered at the way they held on with courage and patience, without losing hope, despite the odds against them in the water-logged dark cave. This proves that when humanity stands together, it creates wonders. What is certainly required is focusing on your goal with a calm & steady demeanour and the will to strive.
A few days ago, the country’s beloved poet Neeraj Ji left us forever. Neeraj ji was blessed with a special quality… it was a combination of hope, faith, a firm resolve and self-confidence. Every word of Neeraj ji’s work can instill a lot of strength & inspiration in us Indians. He wrote
 
The darkness shall be dispelled
Whether you brew up storms
Or make lightening strike
Now that the lamp has been lit
The darkness shall be dispelled
My heartfelt respectful tributes to Neeraj ji.
Usually, the months of July and August are very important for farmers and the youth. This is the time which is Peak season for colleges. Like Satyam, Hundreds of thousands of youth leave schools to join colleges. Whereas February and March get consumed in exams, papers and answers, April & May are meant for enjoying vacations, followed by results and thereafter, shaping a course for one’s life through career choices. July is the month when the youth step into a new phase of life, where the focus shifts from questions and veers towards cut-offs.
The attention of students steers from home to hostel. Students submit themselves to the tutelage of Professors vis a vis the shadow of their parents. I firmly believe that my young friends must be enthusiastic & happy on the commencement of their college life. Leaving home for the first time, moving out of one’s village, coming out of a protective environment amounts to taking charge of the course of one’s life. This multitude of young people leave their homes for the first time to chart a new direction for their lives. Some students might have joined their respective colleges and some must be about to join. All I would like to say to you is ‘Be calm, enjoy life, seek inner happiness in life. There is no alternative to books, one has to study, yet one’s bent of mind should be towards discovering new things. Old friends are invaluable. Childhood friends are precious, but selecting, making & maintaining new friendships is a task that requires immense prudence. Keep learning something new, such as newer skills and languages. Young people who leave their homes for the sake of studies should discover their new places, know more about the people, language, culture & tourism facets related to them. My best wishes to all the young people about to begin a new innings. Referring to the college season reminds me of someone I saw in the News recently… how Asharam Choudhury a student from an extremely poor family in Madhya Pradesh overcame life’s many challenges to achieve success. In his maiden attempt, he cracked the Entrance exam for MBBS at AIIMS, Jodhpur. His father earns his daily bread by waste-picking. I congratulate him on his success. There are many such instances of students from deprived families who, through sheer determination & perseverance overcame all odds and stood out to be beacons of inspiration to others. Examples such as Prince Kumar of Delhi, whose father is a DTC bus driver, Abhay Gupta of Kolkata who studied on foothpaths under street lights, Bitiya Afreen Sheikh of Ahmedabad, whose father drives an auto rickshaw, Nagpur’s daughter Khushi, whose father is a school bus driver, Karthik of Haryana, whose father is a watchman or Ramesh Sahu of Jharkhand, whose father is a brick-kiln labourer… or Gurgaon’s divyang angel Anushka Panda, who suffers from a hereditary disorder called spinal muscular atrophy… all of them overcame each & every obstacle through their firm resolve and Zeal, attaining success for the world to see. If we look around, we can see many such examples.
Any commendable incident from any part of the country infuses my heart with energy and inspires me. And when I mention the glorious journey of these youth, I am reminded of Neeraj ji’s line which sum up the raison d’etre of life. Neeraj ji has said
 
How I wish to make the sky listen to
the song of the earth
How I wish to inspire every strand of darkness
to come to the radiance of light
And I wish to conquer the might of the sword
With the fragrance of flowers
And to awaken the mountains
with the Sweetness of songs.
My dear countrymen, a few days ago I happened to glance through a news item, it said- “Two youths make Modi’s dream come true”. On reading further, I came to know how our youngsters put in efforts to transform the lives of the common man by making smart and creative use of technology.
It so happened that once I was interacting with Indian youth in San Jose town of America hailed as a Technology Hub. I had appealed to those young people to think over how could they use their talent to India’s benefit and do something in that direction whenever they found time. I had made an appeal to change brain-drain into brain-gain. Two IT Professionals from Rae Bareilly Yogesh Sahu ji and Rajneesh Bajpayee ji accepted my challenge and made a unique attempt. With their joint efforts, Yogesh ji and Rajneesh ji have developed a SmartGaonApp by utilizing their professional skills. This App is not only connecting the villagers with the whole world but now they can obtain any information on their own mobile phones. Residents of the village Taudhakpur in Rae Bareilly, village chief, District Magistrate, CDO and every one joined in to create awareness amongst the masses. This App is actually bringing in a Digital Revolution in the village, with the help of this App, it has since become easier to record, track and monitor developmental work being done in the village. This App contains phone directory, News section, events list, health centre and information centre of the village. This App is very useful for the farmers and the grammar feature of the App and FACT rate among the farmers functions like a market place for their products. If you look into this incident minutely, one thing will strike you and that is the young man living in America adhering to that country’s life-style and ideology, who left India many years ago but, knows the finer details about his village, knows about the challenges and still is emotionally attached to his village. This seems to be the reason as to how he could develop this App which is most suited to needs of the village.
A sense of belonging towards the village and towards one’s roots and also a spirit to show and do something is naturally there in each and every Indian.
But, sometimes because of time, sometimes because of distance and at times because of situations that spirit gets faded but just with a touch of a tiny spark, everything re-emerges which takes one back to old memories. We should also check if such a thing has happened in our case too whether circumstances, situations, distances have made us alien, whether dust has gathered over our determinations.
Do think.
Santoshji, many – many thanks for your phone call. Actually, Pandharpur Wari is an amazing journey in itself. Friends, Ashadhi Ekadashi, which fell on 23rd July, is celebrated as a day of grand transformation of Pandharpur Wari. Pandharpur is a holy town in Solapur district in Maharashtra. About 15-20 days before Ashadhi Ekadashi warkari or pilgrims start the Pandharpur Yatra on foot. This yatra (journey) is known as Wari and lakhs of warkaris join this. Wooden foot wear or padukas of great saints like Saint Gyaneshwar and Saint Tukaram are placed in a palki and pilgrims begin their pilgrimage chanting “Vitthal-Vitthal”. Pilgrims go to have a darshan of Vitthal who is also known as Vithoba or Pandurang. Lord Vitthal safeguards the interests of the poor, the deprived ones and the ones who are suffering. People from Maharashtra, Karnataka, Goa, Andhra Pradesh, Telengana have deep devotion and respect for Vitthal.
Visiting Vithoba temple in Pandharpur and its grandeur, beauty and spiritual bliss is a unique experience in itself. I request the listeners of “Mann Ki Baat” to visit Pandharpur Wari at least once, whenever they get a chance. Innumerable saints like Gyaneshwar, Namdev, Eknath, Ram Dass, Tukaram are relevant even today in educating the masses. They are imparting energy to fight against superstition in each and every corner across the country. May they be compositions like Bharud (Hkk:M) or Abhang (vHkax), we get a great message of amity, love and brotherhood. We get the mantra to enable the society to fight against blind-faith through devotion and bhakti. These were the people who, at times restrained and corrected the society, even showed a mirror and ensured that old evil traditions get eradicated from the society and that people inculcated a culture of compassion, equality and righteousness. Our mother India is a land full of gems and treasures and the tradition of these great saints that adorned our land are at the same level as the great men who dedicated and sacrificed their lives for our Mother India. One such great man has been Lok Manya Tilak who has left a very deep impression on the hearts of a large number of Indians. We remember and pay our homage to Tilak ji on his birth anniversary on 23rd July and his death anniversary on 1st August.
Lokmanya Tilak was full of courage and self-confidence. He had the courage to show a mirror to the British about their wrong doings. The British were so afraid of Lok Manya Tilak that they tried to charge him of sedition thrice in two decades; this is no small thing. I want to narrate an interesting incident to the countrymen which is connected with Lok Manya Tilak and his statue in Ahmedabad. When in October 1916, Lok Manya Tilak ji came to Ahmedabad, more than 40,000 people that time gave him a welcome and during that very visit, Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel had a chance to talk to him. Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel was greatly impressed by Lok Manya Tilakji. When on August 1 1920, Lok Manya Tilakji passed away, Patel ji had decided then itself that he would build his statue in Ahmedabad. Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel was elected the Mayor of Ahmedabad municipal corporation and he immediately selected Victoria Garden as a venue for Lok Manya Tilak’s memorial and this was the very Victoria Garden which was named after the British Queen. The British were naturally not happy with this and the collector continually kept denying permission. But Sardar Saheb was also Sardar Saheb after all, he was persistent and had remarked that he might have to give up on his post but Lok Manya Tilakji’s statue would certainly be built there. Finally, the statue got built and Sardar Saheb got it unveiled by none other than Mahatma Gandhi on 28th February, 1929; and the most interesting point is that during that inaugural ceremony revered Bapuji said that with the coming of Sardar Patel, Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation has not only got a man but it has got the strength on the basis of which, building the statue of Tilakji has become possible. And my dear countrymen, the speciality about this statue is that this is a rare statue of Tilakji in which he is sitting in a chair and in this “Swaraj is our birthright” (“Swaraj Hamara Janma Sidhha Adhikar Hai”) is inscribed right below Tilakji’s statue. And this all happened during the period of British rule. Tradition of publicly celebrating Ganesh Utsav was also initiated with the efforts of Lok Manya Tilakji. The celebration of Ganesh Utsav publicly had become an effective medium in promoting a spirit of social awakening, integration, amity and equality among the masses besides projecting a sense of dedication and festivity in them. This was the period when there was a need for people to get united in the fight against the British; these festivals, by breaking the barriers of casteism and communalism served the purpose of uniting all. Such events gained more popularity with the passage of time. Thus, it becomes clear that our younger generations still care for the brave heroes of our ancient past, its heritage and history. Today, you can see Ganesh pandals in almost every street of various cities. All families in that street collectively organize these pandals. This is an excellent chance for our youth wherein they can learn qualities of leadership and organization and inculcate these in themselves.
My dear countrymen! I had requested last time too and now, while remembering Lokmanya Tilak, I will once again urge all of you to celebrate Ganesh Utsav with great enthusiasm and fervour whole heartedly but insist on keeping these celebrations eco-friendly. Right from Ganesh idol to all decorative material everything ought to be eco friendly and I will appreciate that separate competitions be organized in each city, prizes be awarded for these; and I will like that eco friendly items related to Ganesh Utsav are displayed for wider publicity on My Gov and Narendra Modi App.
I will surely send your ideas and efforts to the people. Lokmanya Tilak evoked self- confidence amongst our countrymen and gave the slogan “Swaraj is our birth right and I shall have it.” Today is the time to say that Good Governance is our birth right and we will have it.
Every Indian should have access to good governance and positive results of development. It is the factoring in of this outreach that will create a new India. After 50 years of Tilak’s birth, on the same day i.e. on July 23, another son of Mother India was born, who sacrificed his life so that his countrymen could breathe freely in an atomsphere of freedom. I am talking about none other than Chandrasekhar Azad. Where will you find a young man in India who will not be inspired listening to these lines –
Sarfaroshi ki tamanna ab hamare dil mein hai
Dekhna hai zor kitna baazu-e-qaatil mein hai
(The desire for martyrdom is now in our hearts
Let us see the strength in the arms of my executioner)
These lines inspired many young people like Ashfaq Ullah Khan, Bhagat Singh, Chandrashekhar Azad and many others. Azad’s courage and passion for freedom inspired the youth of the day. Chandrashekhar Azad put his life on the stake, but he never bowed in front of the foreign rule. It was my privilege and good fortune that I had the opportunity of going to Chandrasekhar Azad’s native village of Alirajpur in Madhya Pradesh. I had the opportunity to pay homage in Chandrashekhar Azad Park in Allahabad, Chandrasekhar Azad Ji was a brave man who did not wish to die by the bullet of foreigners – he wished to fight for independence as a free man and if he had to die, he wished to remain a free man! This is what was so special about him. Once again, I bow and pay tributes to the two great sons of Bharat Mata – Lokmanya Tilakji and Chandrasekhar Azad ji.
Just a few days ago, in the Junior Under-20 World Athletics Championship in Finland, India’s brave daughter and a farmer daughter Hima Das made history by winning the gold medal in the 400-meter race event. Ekta Bhyan, another daughter of the country, in response to my letter, has emailed me from Indonesia, where she is now preparing for the Asian Games. Ekta in her e-mail writes – ‘The most important moment in the life of any athlete is that when he or she holds the tricolor and I am proud that I could do that.’ Ekta, we all are proud of you. You have brought glory to the Nation. Ekta has won the gold and bronze medals in World Para Athletics Grand Prix 2018 held in Tunisia. Her achievement is all the more special because she has made the imposing challenges in her life the key to her success.
Daughter Ekta Bhyan in 2003, lost the use of half of her lower body due to road accident, but this daughter did not lose courage and made herself all the more stronger to perform this grand feat. Another Divyang, Yogesh Qathuniaji, has won the gold medal in the discus throw in Para Athletics Grand Prix in Berlin and in the process bettered the world record, along with Sundar Singh Gurjar who also won the gold medal in javelin. I salute Ekta Bhyanji, Yogesh Qathuniaji and Sundar Singh Ji, all of you for your fortitude and passion, and congratulate you! May you go further than these successes, keep on playing and keep on blooming.
My dear countrymen, the month of August is significant because it is filled with historically important dates and festivals, but due to the weather sometimes sickness also enters the house. I wish all of you best wishes for good health, for this month of August imbued with the spirit of patriotism and for many festivals that have continued over centuries. We will meet once again for ‘Mann Ki Baat’ next time.
Many Many Thanks.






46. AUGUST 26, 2018


My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today, the entire country is celebrating Rakshabandhan. Heartiest greetings to all fellow citizens on this auspicious occasion. The festival of Rakshabandhan symbolizes the bond of love & trust between a brother & a sister. For centuries, this festival has proved to be a shining example of social harmony. In the nation’s history, there are innumerable accounts of this sacred thread, binding together people of distant lands, different religions, around a spindle of trust. In a few days from now, we shall celebrate the festive occasion of Janmashtami. The whole atmosphere will reverberate to the sonorous chants & calls of ‘Hathi, Ghoda, Palki’, ‘Jai KanhaiyaLalki’ and ‘Govinda-Govinda’. It is indeed an extremely joyous experience to imbue the essence of Bhagwan Krishna & revel blissfully. In other parts of the country, especially Maharashtra, our young friends must be busy with preparations of the ‘Dahi-Handi’…. the festive ritual of the human pyramid breaking the curd filled earthen pot. Heartiest greetings to all countrymen on the festive occasions of Rakshabandhanand Janmashtami.
BhaginiChinmayee, भवती संस्कृत –प्रश्न पृष्टवत्ती| Sister Chinmayee has asked a question in Sanskrit. Excellent, extraordinary. My salutations to you. On the occasion of Sanskrit week, I extend my best wishes to all countrymen.
I am extremely thankful to young Chinmayee for touching upon this subject. Friends, apart from Rakshabandhan, ShravanPoornima is also celebrated as Sanskrit Day.
I congratulate all those actively involved in preserving & conserving this glorious heritage, helping it to reach out to the masses. Every language has its own significance, sanctity. India takes great pride in the fact that Tamil is the most ancient of world languages. We Indians also feel proud that from Vedic times to the modern day, Sanskrit language has played a stellar role in the universal spread of knowledge.
Sanskrit language & literature encompasses a storehouse of knowledge pertaining to every facet of life. Science & technology, agriculture & health, Mathematics & Management, economy & environment, the entire spectrum has been touched upon. It is said that our Vedas have detailed reference on Mantras, onways & means to counter the challenges of global warming. You will be pleased to know that even today, residents of village Mattur in Shivamoga district of Karnataka use Sanskrit as their lingua franca.
You will be astonished to know that Sanskrit is a language that possesses the capacity for infinite word formation with two thousand verb roots, 200 suffixes & 22 prefixes; coupled with compounds, the possibility of word-creation is limitless. And that is why the minutest nuance of an expression or subject can be accurately described. This has been the core speciality of Sanskrit.Today, at times, in order to communicate more assertively, we tend to make use of English Quotations or even sher-o-shayari-urdu poetry. But those who are well acquainted with Sanskrit Subhashitas – epigrammatic verses, know very well that it is possible to make a crisp, precise statement, using very few words through the usage of subhashitas. And since there is a sense of geographical &cultural belonging, they are easy to understand & assimilate.
For example, in order to illustrate the significance of the Guru in one’s life, it has been said
एकमपि अक्षरमस्तु गुरु: शिष्यं प्रबोधयेत|
प्रथिव्यां नास्ति तद- दृव्यं, यद – दत्त्वा ह्यनृणीभवेत ||
Thereby meaning, when a guru imparts even an iota of knowledge to the student, there is no material or wealth on the entire earth that the student can make use of, to repay the guru. We must abide by the same essence, the same spirit as we celebrate Teachers’ Day. Knowledge & the guru are incomparable, invaluable, priceless, On the occasion of Teachers’ Day, we remember the great philosopher, former President of India Dr. SarvapalliRadhakrishnanji. His birth anniversary is celebrated as Teacher’ Day across the country. I felicitate all the teachers in the country on this occasion. I also salute your sense of commitment towards science, education and students.
My dear countrymen, the monsoon comes along, bringing a new ray of hope to our toiling farmers. It provided much needed succor to the scorched trees & shrubs, and to parched water bodies; on the other hand excessive rainfall causes devastating floods. It’s a vagary of Nature that some places have received higher rainfall compared to other places. We just saw how the terrible floods in Kerala have affected human lives. In today’s pressing, hard times, the entire Nation is with Kerala. Our sympathies are with those families who lost their loved ones. Loss of lives cannot be compensated, but I assure the grief-stricken families that in this moment of suffering& misery, a hundred & twenty five crore Indians stand by them, shoulder to shoulder. I earnestly pray for those injured in this natural disaster to get well soon. I firmly believe that the sheer grit and courage of the people of the state will see Kerala rise again.
Disasters, unfortunately leave behind a trail of destruction. But one gets to witness facets of humanity, humaneness during disasters. From Kutch to Kamrup, from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, everyone is endeavoring to contribute in some way or the other so that wherever a disaster strikes, be it Kerala or any other part of India, human life returns to normalcy. Irrespective of age group or area of work, people are contributing. Everyone is trying to ensure speedy mitigation of the sufferings people in Kerala are going through, in fact sharing their pain. We know that jawans of our armed forces are the vanguards of rescue & relief operations in Kerala. They have left no stone unturned as saviors of those trapped in the floods. The Air Force, Navy, Army, BSF, CISF, RAF, every agency has played an exemplary role in the rescue & relief operations. I would like to specially mention the arduous endeavors of the NDRF daredevils. At this moment of hardship&agony, their service stands out as a shining example. The capability, commitment & controlling situation through rapid decisions of the NDRF have made them a cynosure of every Indian’s eye, worthy of respect & admiration. Yesterday was the festival of Onam. We pray for Onam to provide strength to the country, especially Kerala so that it returns to normalcy on a newer journey of development. Once again on behalf of all Indians, I would like to re assure each & everyone in Kerala and other affected places that at this moment of calamity, the entire country stands by them.
My dear countrymen ! I was looking into the suggestions received for “Mann Ki Baat”. The subject about which most of the people from across the country have written is “Our revered AtalBehari Vajpayee”. Kirti from Ghaziabad, Swati Vats from Sonepat, brother Praveen from Kerala, Dr. Swapan Banerjee from West Bengal, Akhilesh Pandey from Katihar, Bihar and numerous others have written on Narendra Modi Mobile App and MyGov asking me to speak on various aspects of Atalji’s life. As soon as the people in our country and abroad heard of the demise of Atalji on 16th August, everyone drowned in sadness. He was a leader who gave up his position as Prime Minister fourteen years ago. In a way, he was cut-off from active politics for the last 10 years. He was neither seen in the news nor in public life. Ten years is a huge gap but on 16th August our country and the whole world witnessed that there was not a gap of even a single moment in the commonman’s heart. The wave of love and faith that spread across the nation is an indicator of his great personality. During these last days, many great aspects of Atalji came up to the fore. People remembered him as the best member of Parliament, sensitive writer, best orator and most popular Prime Minister and will continue to remember him. The country will ever remain grateful to Atalji for bringing good governance in the main stream. But, I just want to touch upon one more facet of Atalji’s legendary personality and that is the political culture which Atalji gave to India, his efforts in the direction of bringing about the changes in our political culture, his efforts to mould it into an organized framework and which proved very beneficial for India and a bigger benefit will accrue in days to come. This is certain. India will remain ever grateful to Atalji for bringing the 91st Amendment Act, 2003. This change brought about two important changes in India’s politics.
First one is that the size of the cabinet in states was restricted to 15% of the total seats in the state Assembly.
And the second one is that the limit under the Anti Defection Law was enhanced from one-thirds to two-thirds. Besides, clear guidelines were defined to disqualify the defector.
For many years in India, the political culture of forming a very large cabinet was being misused to constitute jumbo cabinets not only to create a divide but also to appease political leaders. Atalji changed it. This effort of his resulted in saving of money as well as of resources. This also helped in improving efficiency. It could only be a visionary like Atalji who brought in this transformation and as a result of this, healthy traditions blossomed in our polity.
Atalji was a true patriot. It was during his tenure that the timing of presenting the budget was changed. Earlier, as was the British tradition, the Budget used to be presented at 5 pm because in London, Parliament used to start working at that time. In the year 2001, Atalji changed the time of presenting the budget from 5 pm to 11 am. One more freedom-the Indian Flag Code was framed in Atalji’s tenure and it came into effect in 2002. A number of such rules have been included in this code which made it possible to unfurl the tricolor in public places. This provided a chance to more and more of our countrymen to unfurl our national flag. Thus, he brought our beloved tricolor closer to the commonman. You must have noticed how Atalji took bold steps to bring about fundamental reforms, whether in our election process or about the shortcomings concerning the people’s representatives. Similarly, you can see that presently efforts are afoot and discussions are being held about simultaneously holding the elections for Lok Sabha and for state assemblies. The Government and the opposition – both are putting forth their view points. This is a good development and a healthy sign for our democracy. I must say that developing healthy traditions for a sound democracy, making constant efforts to strengthen democracy, encouraging open-minded debates would also be aappropriate tribute to Atalji. Reiterating our resolve to fulfill his dream of a prosperous and developed India, I along with all of you pay tributes to Atalji.
My dear countrymen !whenever a discussion about Parliament is there nowadays, it is about hold-ups, noisy scenes and stalling the proceedings but when something good happens, it is not given much importance. The monsoon session of Parliament ended just a few days back. You will be glad to know that the productivity of Lok Sabha remained 118 percent and that of Rajya Sabha was 74 percent. All the members rose above party interests to make the Monsoon session most productive and this is why Lok Sabha passed 21 bills and in Rajya Sabha fourteen bills were passed. This Monsoon session of Parliament will always be remembered as a session for social justice and youth welfare. A number of importantbills beneficial to the youth and the backward classes were passed during this session. As you know, a demand to constitute an OBC Commission similar to SC/ST commission was long pending for decades. The country fulfilled its resolve this time to make an OBC Commission and also granted it Constitutional powers. This step will prove to be the one to move forward our march towards achieving the goal of social justice. An amendment bill to secure the rights of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes also were passed in this session. This Act will give more security to the interests of SC and ST communities. This will also forbid criminals from indulging in atrocities and will instill confidence among the dalit communities.
No civil society can tolerate any kind of injustice towards the woman-power of the country. The nation will not tolerate those committing rapes. With this point in view Parliament has made a provision of strictest punishment by passing the Criminal Act Amendment Bill. Those guilty of rape will get a minimum sentence of ten years and those found guilty of raping girls below the age of 12 years will be awarded the death sentence. Recently, you might have read in newspapers, that a court in Mandsaur in Madhya Pradesh, after a brief hearing of two months, pronounced the death sentence on two criminals found guilty of raping a minor girl. Earlier, a court in Katni in Madhya Pradesh awarded the death sentence to the guilty after a hearing of just five days. Courts in Rajasthan have also taken similar quick decisions. This Act will play an effective role in curbing crimes against women and girls. Economic growth will be incomplete without a social transformation. The Triple Talaq Bill has been passed by the Lok Sabha although it could not be passed in the Rajya Sabha, I assure the Muslim women that the whole country stands by them to provide them social justice. When we move ahead in the national interest, a change in the lives of the poor, the backward, the exploited and the deprived ones can also be brought about. In the Monsoon session, this time, everyone jointly presented an ideal approach. Today, I publicly express my heartfelt gratitude to all MP’s.
My dear countrymen! The attention of crores of Indians is focused on the Asian Games being held in Jakarta. Every morning, first of all, people look for newspapers, Television, News and Social Media to check Indian playerswinning medals. The Asian Games are going on. I wish to congratulate all players who have won medals for the country. I extend my best wishes to thoseplayers who are yet to compete. Indian players are performing exceedingly well in shooting and wrestling but our players are winning medals in those competitions too, in which our performance has not been so good earlier-like WUSHU and ROWING. These are not just medals but an evidence of the sky high spirits of the Indian players.
Among those winning medals for our country are a large number of our daughters which is a very positive sign; so much so, that youngsters of only 15-16 years of age have brought honour to our country by winning medals. This too is a very positive indication that most of the medal-winners hail from small towns and villages and these players have achieved this success by putting in sheer hard work.
We shall celebrate National Sports Day on 29th August and I extend my best wishes to all sport lovers and also pay my tributes to the legendary hockey wizard Shri Dhyanchandji.
I request every citizen to make it a point to play and take care of their fitness because only a healthy India will build a developed and prosperous India. When India will be fit, only then India’s future will be bright. Once again, I congratulate the medal winners at the Asian Games and also wish the remaining players perform well. Many good wishes to you all on the National Sports Day.
Namaste Bhawnaji, I respect your sentiments. All of us have seen houses and buildings being constructed of bricks and stones but can you imagine that about twelve hundred years ago, a giant mountain which was a single stone mountain was give the shape of an elegant, huge and a unique –temple –this may be difficult to imagine, but this happened and that temple is KailashNathMandir in Ellora, Mahrashtra. Would you believe if someone tells you that about a thousand years ago, an over sixty metrestall pillar of granite was built and anothergranite rock weighing about 80 tonnes was placed over its top. But, Brihdeshwar temple of Thanjavur in Tamil Nadu is the place where this unbelievable combination of Engineering and Architecture can be seen. Anybody will feel overawed on seeing Rani Ki Vaav of the 11th Century in Patan in Gujarat. Our land has been an engineering laboratory. There have been several engineers in India who made the unimaginable possible and presented such marvels of engineering before the world. In this lineage of great engineers, we were blessed with a diamond whose work is still a source of wonder for all.He was Bharat Ratna Dr. M. Visvesvaraya. Lakhs of farmers and common people continue to benefit from the Krishna Raj Sagar Dam built by him. He is greatly revered in that part of our country and the whole nation remembers him with great respect and regard. In his memory, 15th September is observed as Engineers Day. Following his footsteps, our engineers have created their own identity in the world. When I talk of wonders in the Engineering world, I am reminded of an incident of 2001 when a devastating earth quake hit Kutch in Gujarat. I used to work as avolunteer there during those days, I got a chance to go to a village and had a chance to meet a lady of more than a hundred years of age. And she was looking at me and mockingly,saying, “Look at my house. It is called Bhoonga in Kutch.This house has faced three earthquakes. I myself have seen three in this house itself. But, you did not find any damage anywhere. These houses were built by our ancestors in sync with nature and surroundings of this place”.And she was saying all this with such a feeling of pride that it made me think that engineers in that era had constructed such structures according to the local situations which kept the commonman safe and secured. While observing Engineers Day, we should think of the future as well. Workshops should be held at different places. What are the things we need to learn in the changing times? What do we need to teach? What do we need to connect to? Nowadays, disaster management has assumed immense significance. The world is facing natural calamities. What then should be the new form of structural engineering? What courses should be designed to that end? What should be taught to the students? How do we keep construction eco friendly? How can we enhance the quality of construction by making value addition through local materials? How do we make zero waste our priority? All such points need to be pondered upon when we observe Engineers Day.
My dear countrymen! There is a mood of festivity and with this the preparations for Diwali also begin. We will keep meeting through Mann Ki Baat, and will keep sharing matters close to our hearts. We will join hands in taking our country forward with heartfelt vigor. With these feelings, I extend my best wishes to you all. Thanks. We shall meet.


47. SEPTEMBER 30, 2018
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. There must be hardly any Indian who doesn’t feel proud of our Armed Forces, our army jawans, our soldiers. Every Indian, irrespective of region, caste, religion, sect or language, is ever eager to express joy and show solidarity with our soldiers. Yesterday, one hundred and twenty-five crore Indians celebrated the ParaakramParva, the festival of Valour. We remembered that surgical strike carried out in 2016, where our soldiers gave a befitting reply to the audacity of a proxy war under the garb of terrorism. At various places in the country, exhibitions have been organised by our Armed Forces in order to apprise the maximum number of citizens, especially the younger generation, of the might we possess; how capable we are and how our soldiers risk their lives to protect us citizens. A day such as ParaakaramPrava reminds our youth of the glorious heritage of our Army. It also inspires us to maintain the unity & integrity of the country. I too participated in a programme held at Jodhpur in the land of the valiant, Rajasthan. It has now been decided that our soldiers will give a befitting reply to whosoever makes an attempt to destroy the atmosphere of peace and progress in our Nation. We staunchly believe in peace; we are committed to taking it forward… but NOT at the cost of compromising our self-respect and sovereignty of our Nation. India has always been resolutely committed to peace. In the two world-wars fought in the 20th century, over a lakh of our soldiers made the Supreme Sacrifice; that too in a war where we were not involved in any way. We have never eyed someone else’s territory maliciously. This in itself was our commitment & dedication towards peace. A few days ago, on the 23rd of September, on the occasion of the centenary of the Battle of Haifa in Israel, we remembered & paid tributes to our brave soldiers of Mysore, Hyderabad & Jodhpur Lancers who had freed Haifa from the clutches of oppressors. This too was an act of valour on part of our soldiers on the path to peace. Even today, India is one of the largest contributors to various United Nations Peace Keeping Forces in terms of sending forces personnel. For decades, our brave soldiers wearing blue helmets have played a stellar role in ensuring maintenance of World Peace.
My dear countrymen, the sky offers the rarest of hues. It is not at all surprising that the Indian Air Force has proved itself to be the cynosure of every citizen’s eye, through the display of sheer might in the skies. It has bestowed upon us a sense of security. One of the notable features eagerly awaited by spectators during the Republic Day Parade is the Flypast comprising the magnificent display of the might of our Air Force through their breath taking aerobatic manoeuvres.
We celebrate Air Force Day on the 8th of October. Making a humble beginning in 1932 with six pilots and 19 Airmen, our Air Force has emerged as one of mightiest and the bravest Air Force of the 21st century today. From the core of my heart, I congratulate those Air Warriors and their families who rendered service to the nation. In 1947, when Pakistani attackers resorted to an unprecedented attack, it was indeed our Air Force which ensured that Indian Soldiers and armaments reached the battlefield promptly. The Air Force also retaliated befittingly in 1965 too. Who does not know about the Bangladesh Freedom Struggle of 1971? The Air Force played a very significant role in 1999 by pushing back the intruders and liberating Kargil from their clutches. The Air Force defeated the enemy at Tiger Hill by carrying out air sorties on their positions round the clock. Be it the relief and rescue work or disaster management, our country is indebted to our Air Force for the commendable efforts of our Air Warrior. They have always displayed a unique spirit in times of natural calamities like storms, cyclones, floods and forest fires to extend full assistance to our countrymen. The Air Force has set an example in ensuring gender equality and has opened its doors for our daughters of India. Now, the Air Force is offering the option of Permanent Commission to Women besides the Short Service Commission, which I had announced on the 15th of August this year from the Red Fort.
Indian can proudly claim that in the armed forces,our Army not only man-power but woman-power too is contributing equally. Women are already empowered and now getting armed too.
My dear countrymen, a few days ago, Officer AbhilashTomy of our Navy was struggling between life and death. The whole country was concerned about saving Tomy. You know, AbhilashTomy is a very courageous, brave soldier. He was the first Indian who set on a global voyage in a small boat without any modern technology. For the last 80 days, he was moving ahead in South Indian Ocean to participate in the Golden Globe Race maintaining his speed but suddenly a severe cyclonic storm landed him in trouble. Yet, this brave heart from the Navy kept struggling for many days in mid-ocean. He fought to be afloat without food or drink. He did not accept defeat and continued to fight death. A rare example of courage, determination, strength and bravery – a few days ago I talked to Abhilash over the telephone after he was rescued and brought safely ground. I had met Tomy earlier too Despite having faced such a tough situation; his grit & spirit, his determination to make another similar attempt is an inspiration for our younger generation. I pray for Tomy’s sound health and I am sure that his courage, bravery and resolve to fight and emerge a winner will inspire our younger generation.
My dear countrymen, every child in our country knows the importance of the 2nd of October for our nation. The 2nd of October, this year, has a special significance. For two years from now on, we are going to organise various programmes throughout the world on the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi. Mahatma Gandhi’s philosophy has inspired the whole world.
Everyone including great personalities like Dr. Martin Luther King and Nelson Mandela derived strength from Gandhiji’s ideology to be able to fight a long battle to ensure right of equality and dignity for the people. In today’s Mann Ki Baat, I want to talk about another important work of revered Bapu which maximum countrymen should know. In 1941, Mahatma Gandhi started penning down a few thoughts in the shape of a constructive Programme. Later, in 1945, when the Freedom Struggle gained momentum, he prepared an amended copy of those ideas. Revered Bapu, put forth his ideas on various subjects like Farmers, villages, securing of labour rights, cleanliness and promoting of education. This is also known as the Gandhi Charter. Revered Babu was a people’s person. Getting connected with people or connecting people with him was Bapu’s special quality, this was in his nature. Everyone has experienced this as a most unique part of his personality. He made everyone feel that he or she was very important and absolutely necessary for the country. His biggest contribution in the Freedom struggle was that he made it an expansive “Jan-Aandolan” (People’s Movement). During the Freedom Struggle people from all sections and all regions dedicated themselves at Mahatma Gandhi’s call. Bapu gave an inspirational mantra to all of us which is known as Gandhiji’s Talisman. In that, Gandhiji had said, “I give you one mantra, whenever you are in doubt or whenever your ego gets over your personality, undergo this test; remember the face of the poorest or the weakest person that you have seen, recall his looks and ask your inner self how useful your intended step would be for that person. Will this, in anyway, benefit him! Will he be able to get some control over his life and destiny through your step ! Meaning thereby that will your step help millions of those people in getting Swaraj who have an empty stomach and a dissatisfied soul! Then, you will see that your doubt is waning away and your ego is also getting quelled.
My dear countrymen, one of Gandhiji’s mantras is very relevant event today. The swelling middle class of the country, its increasing economic power, increasing purchasing power; can we remember revered Bapu for a moment while going out for shopping! Can we remember that mantra of Bapu!” Can we spare a thought while purchasing anything as to who in my country will be benefitted by this purchase! Whose face will sport a smile! Who will be the fortunate one to get a direct or indirect benefit from your purchase! I will feel much happier if my purchase will benefit the poorest of the poor. Keeping this mantra of Gandhiji in mind while making any purchases during the 150th Anniversary of Gandhiji, we must make it a point to see that our purchase must benefit one of our countrymen and in that too, one who has put in physical labour, who has invested money, who has applied skill must get some benefit. This is the mantra of Gandhiji, this is the message of Gandhiji and I firmly believe that a small step of yours can surely bring about a very big benefit in the life of the poorest and the most underprivileged person.
My dear countrymen, when Gandhiji said that by maintaining cleanliness, freedom will be won then he probably was not aware how this would happen. But this did happen and India got freedom. In the same way today we may feel that even by making a tiny contribution I may be contributing in a big way to help in the economic upliftment and economic empowerment of my country and help fight a battle against poverty by lending strength to the poor. I feel that this is true patriotism, and a perfect tribute to revered Bapu’s work. For example, think of purchasing Khadi and handloom products on special occasions; this will benefit many weavers. It is said that LalBahadurShastriji used to preserve old and worn out Khadi clothes because some one’s labour could be felt in the making of those clothes. He used to say that all these Khadi clothes have been woven after putting in a hard labour, every thread of these clothes must be utilized. This spirit of attachment towards the country and fellow countrymen was deeply imbibed in that great person of a very short physical stature. Two days later, we shall celebrate the birth anniversary of Shastriji along with respected Bapu’s birth anniversary. The very name of Shastriji evokes a feeling of eternal faith in the hearts of us, Indians. His mild persona always fills every Indian with a sense of pride.
LalBahadurShastriji had a unique quality in that, he was very humble outwardly but he was rock solid from inside. His slogan “Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan” is the hall mark of his grand personality. It was the result of his selfless service to the nation that in a brief tenure of about one and a half years he gave to our jawans and farmers the mantra to reach the pinnacle of success.
My dear countrymen, while remembering revered Bapu today, it is quite natural not to skip talking of cleanliness. A movement “Swachhta Hi Sewa” was launched on the 15thof September. Crores of people got connected with this movement and luckily I also got a chance to participate in the voluntary cleanliness shramdaan with the children of Delhi’s Ambedkar School. I went to the school, the foundation of which had been laid by none other than respected Baba Saheb himself. On the 15th of September, people from all sections across the country connected themselves to this voluntary cleaning movement. Institutions also extended their contribution enthusiastically. School children, college students, NCC, NSS, youth organisations, media groups, the corporate world, all of them offered voluntary cleanliness service on a large scale. I heartily congratulate all these cleanliness-loving countrymen for their efforts. Come on, let us listen to a phone call.
Many many thanks, you’ve made a significant remark that cleanliness has a specific meaning in every one’s life and what could be a matter of immense joy for all of us than the fact that a toilet has been built in your house under the “Swachh Bharat Abhiyan” and that, all of you have the facility now. And possibly those connected with this movement may not be able to guess that you cannot see because of your visual challenge. But one understands the difficulties you were facing when there was no toilet and that the construction of this toilet has really proved to be a big boon for you. If you had not made a call about this aspect, perhaps those connected with this cleanliness movement might have also not thought about such a sensitive issue. I specially thank you for your phone call.
My dear countrymen, Swachh Bharat Mission or Clean India Mission has become a success story not only in our country but in the whole world and everyone is talking about this movement. This time India is hosting the biggest Sanitation Convention of the world so far, the Mahatma Gandhi International Sanitation Convention. Sanitation Ministers from countries across the world and experts on the subject of sanitation will converge and share their experiments and experiences. Mahatma Gandhi International Sanitation Convention will conclude on 2nd October, 2018 with the commencement of Bapu’s 150th Birth Anniversary celebrations.
My dear countrymen, there is a Sanskrit quote- ‘न्यायमूलं स्वराज्यं स्यात्’(NyayamoolamSwarajyamSyat) meaning justice lies at the root of swaraj and while discussing the subject of justice, the spirit of human rights is inherent in that. This is specially essential for the freedom and peace of the exploited, victimised and deprived people and to ensure justice for them.
In the Constitution drafted by Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar, many provisions were inserted to protect the fundamental rights of the poor. Inspired by his vision, the ‘National Human Rights Commission’ (NHRC) was formed on 12th October 1993. A few days later NHRC would complete 25 years of its existence.The NHRC has not only protected human rights but has also promoted respect for human dignity over the years. Our most beloved leader, ShriAtalBihari Vajpayee, the former Prime Minister of our country, had clearly said that human rights are not analien concept for us.
In the emblem of our National Human Rights Commission, the ideal mantra harking back to Vedic period- “SarveBhavantuSukhinah” is inscribed. NHRC has instilled widespread awareness of human rights and has played an important role in preventing their misuse. In its journey of 25 years, it has created an atmosphere of hope and confidence in the countrymen. For a healthy society, and for lofty democratic values I feel that, it is a very hope inspiring event. Today, with NHRC operating at the national level, 26 State Human Rights Commissions have also been constituted. As a society, we need to understand the importance of human rights and inculcate them into practice – this is the very basis of Sab kaSaath–Sab kaVikas’.
My dear countrymen, the month of October heralds, Jai Prakash Narayan ji’s birth anniversary, the beginning of the birth centenary of RajmataVijayarajeScindiaji. These luminaries have been infusing inspiration in all of us and we offer our heartfelt tributes to them. 31 October happens to be the birth anniversary of Sardar sahib, I shall dwell upon his birth anniversary in detail in the next episode of Mann Ki Baat but today I want to mention that for the past few years, the occasion of Sardar Sahib’s birth anniversary on October 31 is marked in every small town and district by organizing the ‘Run for Unity’ race.
Even this year, we should try to organize ‘Run for Unity’ in our village, town, city or metropolis. This is the best way to remember SardarSaheb, because he worked for the unity of our nation throughout his lifetime. I urge you all that on October 31, through ‘Run for Unity’, to strengthen our efforts and bind every section of the society as a unified unit. This will be a great tribute to Sardar Sahib.
My dear countrymen, be it Navratri, Durgapuja or Vijayadashmi, I offer all my heartfelt greetings to all of you on account of these holy festivals. Thank you




48. OCTOBER 28, 2018
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. The 31st of October is the birth anniversary of our beloved Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. This year too, the youth of the country is all set, to take part in the ‘Run for Unity’. The weather too these days is pleasant. I urge you to participate in the largest possible numbers in this run for unity. Six months or so before Independence, on the 27th of January, 1947, the world – famous international Magazine ‘Time’ had a photograph of Sardar Patel on the cover page of that edition. In their lead story, they had depicted a map of India; it was nowhere close to what the map looks like now. It was the map of an India that was divided into myriad fragments. There existed over 550 princely states. The English had lost interest in India; they wanted to leave India fragmented into pieces. Time Magazine had opined that hovering over India then were the dangers of problems like partition, violence, food scarcity, price rise and power-politics. The magazine further observed that amidst that plethora of problems, if there was anyone who possessed the capability to unite the country and heal wounds, it was SardarVallabhbhai Patel. The story also brings to the fore other aspects of the life of the Iron Man of India… the manner in which he had managed relief operations during the Ahmedabad floods in the 1920s; the way he steered the BardoliSatyagrah. Such was his sense of honesty & commitment that the farmer, the worker right up to the industrialist trusted him with full faith. Gandhiji considered Sardar Patel as the only one capable of finding a lasting solution to the vexed issue of the states and asked him to act. Sardar Patel formulated solutions one by one, weaving the warp & weft of unity on the axis of a single thread. He ensured the merger of all princely states with the Dominion of India. Whether Junagadh, Hyderabad, Travancore, or for that matter the princely states of Rajasthan, if we are able to see a United India now, it was entirely on account of the sagacity & strategic wisdom of Sardar Patel. It is but natural for us to solemnly remember SardarVallabhbhai Patel as we exalt the spirit of unity that binds our Nation, our Mother India. The 31st of October this year will be special on one more account- on this day, we shall dedicate the statue of unity of the nation as a true tribute to Sardar Patel. Erected on the banks of river Narmada in Gujarat, the structure is twice the height of the Statue of Liberty. This is the world’s tallest scyscraping statue. Every Indian will now be proud to see the world’s tallest statue here on Indian soil. Sardar Patel, a true son of the soil will adorn our skies too. I hope every Indian being will swell with pride on this remarkable feat of mother India… and will sing paeans of glory in its praise with the head held high. Of course, the inner wish to visit the statue of unity will come naturally to every Indian. I am sure this will turn out to be a described destination for one & all across the country.
My dear brothers & sisters, we celebrated ‘Infantry Day’ yesterday. I respectfully bow before all of them who are part of the Indian Armed Forces. I also salute the families of our soldiers. But, do you know why we Indian citizens commemorate this day as Infantry Day? This is the very day when Indian Forces landed in Kashmir and saved the valley from the clutches of aggression. This incident too is directly related to SardarVallabhbhai Patel. I was reading an old interview with the celebrated Army officer samManekshaw. In that interview, field Marshal Sam Manekshaw was reminiscing on times when he was a Colonel. Around this time, military operations commenced in Kashmir. Field Marshal Manekshaw has mentioned how in a meeting,SardarVallabhbhai Patel was irked on the delay in sending troops to Kashmir During the proceedings, Sardar Patel gave him a characteristic glance and reiterated that there should be no delay in our Army operation and that a solution should be sought swiftly. And immediately after that, our troops flew to Kashmir… we’ve seen how our Army was successful. The 31st of October also is the death anniversary of our former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. Our respectful tributes to Indira ji too.
My dear countrymen, who doesn’t love sports? Elements like spirit, strength, skill, stamina are extremely important in the world of sports. They are the ultimate test for a sportsperson’s mettle… all four of these virtues form the core foundation of nation – building universally. If the youth of a country possess these qualities, that country will progress not only in areas such as Economy and Science & Technology but also bring laurels home in the field of sports. Just recently I had two memorable meetings. First, I got an opportunity to meet our Para Athletes who participated in the Asian Para Games 2018 held at Jakarta. These athletes bagged a tally of 72 medals, creating a new, unprecedented record, bringing glory to the nation. I was fortunate to get an opportunity to meet all these talented athletes personally. I congratulated them. Their grit & determination; their resolve to overcome all odds in the path of success is indeed inspiring for all our countrymen. Similarly, I was blessed with a chance to meet our winners of the Summer youth Olympics 2018 held in Argentina. You will be pleased to know that in the Summer Youth Olympics 2018, the performance of our youth was the best ever. At this event we won 13 medals besides 3 in mixed events. You may recall that even, in the recent Asian Games, India’s performance was par excellence. Have you observed the way I have frequently used terms such as ‘the best ever’ or ‘new, unprecedented record’? This is the real story of Indian Sports which are witnessing an upswing with each passing day. India is setting new records not just in the field of sports but also in hitherto uncharted areas. To give you an example, I would like to mention about Para Athlete Narayan Thakur, who won a gold medal for the country in the 2018 Para Asian Games. He is a Divyang by birth. When he turned eight he lost his father. Then he spent another eight years in an orphanage. After leaving the orphanage, he eked out a living cleaning DTC buses and working as waiter at roadside eateries. The same Narayan is winning medals for India at International events. Not just that, just observe the rapidly enhancing levels of excellence in Indian sports !Hitherto, India had never won a medal in a Judo event, at the junior or senior level. But Tabaabi Devi created history by bagging the silver medal at the youth Olympics. 16 year old player Tabaabi Devi hails from a village in Manipur. Her father is a labourer and mother a fish-seller. There were times when the family had no money to buy food. Even such hardships were not able to cow down her zest & devotion. And she has created history by winning a medal for the country. Stories like these are innumerable. Every life, every being is a source of inspiration. Every young sportsperson’s passion & dedication is the hallmark of New India.
My dear countrymen, you may recall that we had successfully organized FIFA Under- 17 World Cup in the year2017. The whole world acclaimed this as a very successful tournament. FIFA Under -17 World Cup had created a record in terms of the number of viewers on the ground. More than 12 lakh enthusiasts enjoyed the romance of Football matches in various stadia across the country and boosted the morale of the young players. This year also, we have been fortunate to be the hosts of the Men’s Hockey World Cup 2018 in Bhubaneshwar. The Hockey World Cup will commence on the 28th November to be concluded on the 16th December. Each Indian who plays any game or has interest in any game has a definite interest in Hockey. India has a golden history in Hockey. India has won gold medals in various tournaments and has been the World Champion once. India has produced many great hockey players. Wheneverthere will be reference to Hockey,the story will remain incomplete without a mention of these legends. Hockey maestro Major Dhyan Chand is a renowned name all over the world. Then, from Balbeer Singh Senior, Leslie Claudius, Mohammad Shahid, Udham Singh to Dhan Raj Pillai, Indian Hockey has had a very long journey. Even today, players of Team India are encouraging the younger generation through their hard work and focused attention.
It is a good chance for the sport lovers to witness closely contested matches. Go to Bhubaneshwar and cheer up the Indian team and also encourage each team there. Odisha has a dignified historical background and has a very rich cultural tradition. People of the state are full of warmth. This is a chance for the sports lovers to see Odisha. They can visit the world famous holy places like the Sun Temple of Konark, Lord Jagannath Temple in Puri and Chilka Lake along with enjoying the games there. I convey my best wishes to our Men’s Hockey Team for this tournament and assure them that 125 crore Indians are supporting them. I also convey my wishes to all the teams from around the world coming to participate in the tournament.
My dear countrymen, the way people are coming forward and volunteering for social works is really inspirational and encouraging for all our countrymen. “Service is Supreme” has been India’s tradition since centuries and we can feel the scent of this tradition in each and every sector today as well. But, in this new era, the new generation is coming forward in a new way with a fresh vigour and spirit to fulfill their new dream. Recently, I attended a programme where a portal was launched, its name is ‘Self 4 Society’, MyGov and the IT and Electronics industry of the country have launched this portal with a view to motivating their employees for social activities and providing them with opportunities to perform in this field. Their dedication and vigour can make each Indian feel proud. A fresh and pleasant air of IT to society, We-not I, a transformation from the individual to the community is imbibed in this. Someone is teaching the old people; someone is involved in the campaign of cleanliness whereas someone is helping out the farmers. And there is no vested interest behind all these activities but a pure feeling of dedication and resolve is the driving force. One young person learned to play wheelchair basket ball in order to be able to help the wheelchair basket ball team of differently abled, divyang players. This spirit, this dedication is a mission mode activity. Will this not make every Indian feel proud. This spirit of ‘We, not I’ will surely inspire all of us.
My dear brothers and sisters, when I was going through your suggestion for Mann Ki Baat this time, I found a very interesting comment from Shri Manish Mahapatra from Pudducherry. He wrote on Mygov- Please take up the topic “in Mann Ki Baat” as to how the tribes and their traditions and rituals are the best examples of coexistence with the nature. How do we need to adopt their traditions in our lives for achieving sustainable development and learn from those traditions?Manishji, I appreciate you for bringing this subject among the listeners of Mann Ki Baat. This is one subject that inspires us to look into our dignified past and our ancient traditions, Today, the whole world and specially the western countries are discussing about environment protection and are trying to find new ways to adopt a balanced life style. Our country is also facing this problem. But, for its solution we only have to look inwards, to look into our glorious past and our rich traditions and have especially to understand the lifestyle of our tribal communities. To live in consonance and closed coordination with the nature has been an integral part of our tribal communities. Our tribal brethren worship trees and plants and flowers like gods and goddesses. The Bhil tribes of Central India and specially those in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh worship Peepal and Arjun trees religiously. TheBishnoi community in the desert land of Rajasthan has shown us a way of environment protection. Specially, in the context of serving trees, they prefer laying down their lives but cannot tolerate any harm to a single tree. Mishmi tribes of Arunachal Pradesh claim their relationship with tigers. They even treat them like their brothers and sisters. In Nagaland as well, tigers are seen as the forest guardians. People of Warli Community in Maharashtra consider tigers as their guests and for them the presence of tigers is a good omen indicating prosperity. There is a belief among the Kol community in Central India that their fortune is directly connected with the tigers and they firmly believe that if the tigers do not get food, the villagers will have to facehunger . The Gond tribes in Central Indai stop fishing in some parts of Kaithan river during the breeding season. They consider this area as a fish reserve and they get plentiful of healthy fishes because of this belief of theirs. Tribal communities make their dwelling units from natural material which are strong as well as eco-friendly. In the isolated regions of the Nilgiri plateau in South India, a small wanderer community Toda make their settlements using locally available material only.
My dear brothers and sisters, this is a fact that the tribal community believes in very peaceful and harmonious co-existence but, if somebody tries to harm and cause damage to their natural resources, they do not shy away from fighting for their rights. There is no wonder that our foremost freedom fighters were the brave people from our tribal communities. Who can forget BhagwanBirsaMunda who struggled hard against the British Empire to save their own forest land. Besides whatever I have said, there is a very long list of examples of the tribal communities which teach us how to keep a close coordination and make adjustments with the nature and the nation is indebted to our tribal people for the forest land that is still remaining with us. Come on, let us express our gratitude towards them.
My dear countrymen, in “Mann Ki Baat”, we talk about those persons and institutions who make extra-ordinary contribution for the society. These works may seem small but have a very deep impact in changing our thinking and in giving a new direction to the society. A few days ago, I was reading about a farmer brother Gurbachan Singh from Punjab. The son of this hard working farmer Gurbachan Singh ji was to be married. Gurbachan Singh ji had told the bride’s parents that the marriage would be performed in a solemn manner. There is absolutely no need to spend much on wedding reception or any other item. We have to keep it a very very simple event. But then he suddenly said that he had one condition. And, when a condition is put these days, generally it is thought that the other side is going to make a big demand which will be really difficult for the bride’s family to fulfill. But, you will be surprised to know that Bhai Gurbachan Singh was a simple farmer and what he told the bride’s father and the condition he placed reflects the true strength of our society. Gurbachan Singh ji asked him to promise that they will not burn parali or stubble in their fields. You can well imagine the social strength this statement had. This point made by Gurbachan Singh ji appears quite ordinary but this reveals how tall and strong his personality is and we have seen that there are many families in our society who connect their individual matters with the benefit of the society as a whole. ShrimanGurbachan Singh ji’s family has presented one such example before us. I have also read about a village KallarMajra which is near Nabha in Punjab. KallarMajra came into lime light as the farmers there mix the stubble with the sand by ploughing their fields rather than burning the stubble and adopt the necessary technology for the process. Congratulations to bhaiGurbachan Singh ji ! Congratulations to the people of KallarMajra and of all those places who are making their best efforts to keep the environment clean and pollution free. All of you are carrying forward the Indian tradition of a healthy life style as a true successor. Just as a sea is formed by collection of tiny drops, similarly,a small constructive step, plays a vital role in creating a positive environment.
My dear countrymen, it has been told in our epics:-
ॐ द्यौ: शान्तिः अन्तरिक्षं शान्तिः,
पृथिवी शान्तिः आपः शान्तिः ओषधयः शान्तिः |
वनस्पतयः शान्तिः विश्वेदेवाः शान्तिः ब्रह्म शान्तिः,
सर्वं शान्तिःशान्तिरेव शान्तिः सामा शान्तिरेधि||
ॐ शान्ति: शान्ति:शान्ति:||
It means- O, Lord, peace should prevail all around in all three “Lokas”,in water, in air, in space, in fire, in wind, in medicines, in vegetation, in gardens, in sub conscious, in the whole creation. Grant peace to each soul, each heart, in me, in you, in every particle and everywhere in the Universe. Om Shanti: Shanti: Shanti:.
Wherever there will be a talk of world peace, India’s name and contribution will be written in golden letters. For India, 11th of November this year has a special significance because on 11thNovember a hundred years back the World War I had ended. Ending of that war is completing one hundred years meaning thereby that a century of ending of the vast devastation and human loss would also get completed. For India, World War I was an important event. Rightly speaking we had no direct connection with that war. Despite this, our soldiers fought bravely and played a very big role and made the supreme sacrifice. Indian soldiers showed it to the world that they are second to none if it comes to war. Our soldiers have displayed great valour in difficult areas and adverse conditions. There has just been a single objective behind it- Restoration of peace. The world witnessed a dance of death and devastation during the World War I; According to estimates, around one crore soldiers and almost the same number of civilians lost their lives. This made the whole world realize and understand the importance of peace. The definition of peace has changed in the last hundred years. Today, peace does not only mean ‘no war’. There is a need to work unitedly to address issues such as terrorism, climate change, economic development to social justice through universal cooperation and co-ordination. Development of the poorest of the poor is the real indicator of peace.
My dear countrymen, our North-East has a unique distinction of its own. The natural beauty of North –East has no parallel and the people of this area are extremely talented. Now our North-east is also known for all best deeds. North east is one region that has made grand progress in organic farming. A few days ago Sikkim won the prestigious Future Policy Gold Award, 2018 for encouraging the sustainable food system. This award is given by the UN body ‘Food & Agriculture Organisation’ – FAO. You will be delighted to know that this best policy making award is equivalent to an Oscar in the sector. Not only this, our Sikkim outperformed 51 nominated policies of 25 countries to win this award. For this, I heartily compliment the people of Sikkim.
My dear countrymen, October is about to end. Quite a change is being felt in the weather. Winter has set in and with the changing weather, the season of festivals has also set in – Dhanteras, Deepawali, BhaiyaDooj, Chhatth – in a way it can be said that the month of November is the month of festivals. I extend my best wishes to all countrymen for these festivals.
I would request all of you to take best care of yourselves and take care of your health as well and also take care of social interests. I am sure these festivals are an opportunity to make new resolves. These festivals prove a chance to advance in a mission mode and to make firm resolves in your life. Your progress is a vital part of the country’s progress. The more you progress, the more will the country progress. My best wishes to you all. Thank you very very much.


49. NOVEMBER 25, 2018
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. On the 3rd of October, 2014, the pious occasion of Vijayadashmi, we embarked upon a journey together through the medium of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. This journey has reached its 50th episode today. Thus, this Golden Jubilee Episode is indeed gilt-edged in every sense of the term. Your letters and phone calls this time pertain mostly to these 50 episodes. Anshu Kumar & Amar Kumar from Delhi on Mygov, Vikas Yadav from Patna; on similar lines Monica Jain from Delhi, Prosenjit Sarkar from Bardhaman, West Bengal and Sangeeta Shastri from Nagpur converge in asking a shared question. They are of the view that broadly speaking, their Prime Minister being associated with the latest in technology, Social Media and Mobile Apps; WHY did he choose radio as a medium to connect with his countrymen? Your curiosity is but natural; in this age when Radio was fading into oblivion, why did Modi opt for the airwaves? Let me quote an incident. The year was 1998. I was then a party worker with the Bharatiya Janata Party organization in Himachal. It was the month of May; and I was travelling to a certain place. Evenings tend to get cold in the hilly terrain of Himachal Pradesh, and I stopped by at a wayside tea stall and placed an order for tea. It was a tiny joint; there was only one person who would make & serve tea. He was not even adequately clad; it was a standalone kiosk on the edge of the road. He first picked up a Laddoo from a glass container, offered the sweetmeat to me & said, “Sir, eat this before the tea get ready”. I was taken aback and asked him “What is the matter? Is it in celebration of an occasion like a wedding?” He replied, “No brother, nothing like that! Don’t you know? It’s a momentous, joyous occasion”. On seeing his rather jubilant exuberance, I asked him, “But what exactly happened?” And he replied, “India has exploded the bomb today!” I exclaimed, “India has exploded the bomb! I don’t get it!” Said he “Sir, just listen to the radio”. Indeed, that exactly was the topic of discussion on the radio. It was then that he elaborated on how on the day of the nuclear test, the then Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee had announced to the Media and how he broke into a dance on listening to it on the radio. It was matter of great intrigue to me to see a lone tea seller in a remote, snow – clad hilly place,who possibly kept listening to the radio the entire day… watching that particular effect of the news on radio led me to realize & internalise that this was a medium that was truly connected with the masses… and that it was a mighty means of getting across.
In terms of the reach & depth of communication, radio has been incomparable. I have been nursing that feeling ever since, acknowledging its power & strength. Hence when I became the Prime Minister, it was natural for me to turn towards a strong, effective medium. And in 2014, when I took charge as the Pradhan Sevak, Principal Servant, it was my wish to reach out to the masses with the glorious saga of our country’s unity, her grand history, her valour, India’s diversity, our cultural diversity, virtues embedded in our society such as Purusharth, Tapasya, Passion & sacrifice; in a nutshell, the great story of India. From remote villages to Metro cities, from farmers to young professionals … the array just prompted me to embark upon this journey of ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Every month, we would read letters to the tune of lakhs, listen to phone calls, watch comments on the App & Mygov. Weaving a common thread comprising them all into a fabric of informal conversation, we have been able to travel together, over this rather long distance of 50 episodes. Recently, All India Radio got a survey done on ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I came across some feedback that is very interesting. Out of the designated sample in the survey, 70% of respondents on an average happen to be listeners who regularly tune in to ‘’Mann Ki Baat’. Most people believe that the greatest contribution of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has been the enhancement of a feeling of positivity in our society. The medium of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has promoted many a mass revolution. #indiapositive has been the subject of quite an extensive discussion. This is an exemplary glimpse of the feeling of positivity, innate to our countrymen. People have shared their experiences, conveying the rise of selfless volunteerism as a consequence of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. It is a change where people are increasingly willing to contribute for the sake of service to society. I am overjoyed on account of the fact that through ‘Mann Ki Baat’, radio is rising as a popular medium, more than ever before. But it’s not about just radio… people are connecting with this programme and ensuring their participation through T.V., FM Radio, Mobile, Internet, Facebook Live; along with periscope, through the NarendraModiApp too. I express my gratitude to the entire family of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ for being a part of it & trusting it wholeheartedly.
PHONE CALL-1
Thank you very much for your phone call. Your apprehension is not misplaced. The fact is, if a leader gets hold of a microphone with assured listeners to the tune of millions, what else does he need? Significantly, some young friends have attempted a study on the myriad subjects touched upon, over the many episodes of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. They did a lexical analysis of all the episodes to calculate the frequency of occurrence of particular words; whether there were some words that were oft-repeated! One of their findings was that, this programme has remained apolitical. When ‘Mann Ki Baat’ commenced, I had firmly decided that it would carry nothing political, or any praise for the Government, nor Modi for that matter anywhere. The greatest bulwark in ensuring adherence to my resolve; in fact my highest inspiration, have been you. As a run up to each episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, the expectations & aspirations of listeners through their letters, online comments & phone calls are crystal clear. Modi may come and go, but this country will never let go of its UNITY & permanence, our culture will always be immortal. These minute stories encompassing a 130 crore countrymen will always stay alive. This new inspiration & zest will keep taking her to greater heights. At times, when I look back, I am taken aback. Sometimes people who write in from different corners of the country say, “We should not haggle beyond limits with marginal shopkeepers, auto drivers, vegetable sellers et al”. I read a letter & then try to weave it with the essence of a similar letter. I would like to share a couple of personal experiences with you … who knows how soon these will reach our families; who knows when social media will circulate them to usher in a revolution!. The stories that you’ve sent across in the context of cleanliness, myriad examples of common folk… you never know where a tiny brand ambassador of cleanliness comes into being in various homes; someone who reprimands elders at home; or even admonishingly orders the Prime Minister through a phone call!
Who would have imagined that a small campaign “selfie with daughter”starting from a small village in Haryana would spread not only throughout the country but also across other countries as well. Every section of the society including celebrities joined in to ignite a process of transformation in a new modern language of change that the present generation understands and follows. At times Mann Ki Baat is also sneered at but 130 crore countrymen ever occupy a special pleace in my heart. Their heartsand my heart beat to the same rhythm. Mann Ki Baat is not about the Government it is about the society. Mann Ki Baat addresses an aspirational India, an ambitious India. Politics or Political Power are not intrinsic to the Indian ethos; on the contrary social values and society are. In fact, Politics is one of the numerous other aspects of social life. Making politics an all pervasive, powerful factor is not an effective way for a healthy society. At times, political developments and political people assume such overriding prominence that other talents and courageous deeds get overshadowed. For ensuring a bright future for a country such as India, it isour collective responsibility to acknowledge and honour the common man’s talent and deeds and Mann Ki Baat is a humble and modest effort in this direction.
PHONE CALL- 2 (PROMITA)
Manythanks for your phone call. In a way your question were the a personal,amiable touch. I believe that the biggest achievement of the 50 episodes of Mann Ki Baat is that one feels like talking to a close acquaintance and not to the Prime Minister, and this is true democracy. If I reply to the question asked by you straightaway then I will say that I do not make any preparation. Actually, Mann Ki Baat is a very simpletask for me. Every time before Mann Ki Baat, letters are received from people; people share their ideas and view points on Mygov and Narendra Modi Mobile App and there is also a toll free number – 1800117800;and by calling on this number, people record messages in their own voice. My effort is that I read the maximum number of these letters and comments myself before Mann Ki Baat. I listen to many phone calls too. Andas the episode of Mann Ki Baat draws closer, I read ideas and inputs sent by you very minutely while travelling.
My countrymen stay in my heart every moment and that is how the writer’s situation and ideas expressed in the letter become part of my thought process. That letter does not remain a mere a piece of paper for me.As it is I have spent close to 40 to 45 years as a travelling mendicant and have been to most of the districts in our country including the remotest once where I spent a lot of time.That is why I am able to relate myself to the place and context of the letter. Then, I note down facts like the name of the village and of the person. Honestly speaking, Mann Ki Baat carries my voice but the examples, emotions and spirit represent my countrymen, I thank every person contributing to Mann Ki Baat. There are lakhs of persons whose names I have not been able to include in Mann Ki Baat but without any disappointment,they continue to sendin their letters and comments. I firmly believe that your ideas and your views will continue reaching me in even greater numbers and will help make Mann Ki Baat more interesting, effective and useful. An effort is also made that the concerned department should pay attention to such letters and comments which, somehow, could not be included in Mann Ki Baat. I also thank my colleagues from All India Radio, FM Radio, Doordarshan, other TV Channels and the Social Media. It is due to their hard work that Mann Ki Baat reaches maximum number of people. The team from All India Radio prepares each episode for broadcast in a number of regional languages. Some of them very aptly narrate in a voice and style resembling that of Modi’s.In this way for those 30 minutes they become Narendra Modi. I congratulate and thank those persons for their talent and skills. I would request all of you also to kindly listen to this programme in your regional language as well. I sincerely thank from the core of my heart my friends in the media who regularly telecast Mann Ki Baat on their channels. No political person is ever happy with the media, he feels that he is getting a very little coverage or the coverage given to him is negative.But many issues raised in Mann Ki Baat have been adopted by the media. Issues such as cleanliness, Road safety, drugs free India, selfie with daughter have been taken up by the media and turn into campaigns. TV channels made it the most watched radio programme – I sincerely thank and congratulate the media. Without your contribution and cooperation, this journey of Mann Ki Baat would have been incomplete.
PHONE CALL- 3 (NIDHI BAHUGUNA)
Nidhi ji, many thanks for your phone call! To tell you the truth, I have no such secret. What I am doing must be happening in families as well. In simple words, I may say that I try to cast myself into the mould of that young man, and put myself under his conditions and try to adjust and match the wave length accordingly. There are old baggage’s of our own lives and when they do not come in the way, it becomes easier to understand others. Sometimes our inhibitions or prejudices become a big hurdle in communication. I prefer to understand the other man’s point of view rather than going through the process of acceptance, rejection and reaction. My experience has been that by adopting this approach, the other side also tries to come to our wave length rather than arguing or creating pressure in order to convince thereby removing the communication gap and both sides become co-travelers in our journey of idea-sharing. None of the two even realizes that how and when one other’s has abandoned its idea and accepted and owned the idea of the other side.
Today’s youths have this special quality that they won’t do anything which they do not believe themselves and whenever they believe in something, they follow that leaving everything else. People generally talk of a communication gap between the elders and teenagers in the family. In fact, the scope of discussion with teenagers is quite limited in most of the families. Most of the time these talks remain limited to studies, habits or life style and the “do’s” and “don’ts”. An open discussion without any expectations is gradually on the decline and this too is a matter of concern.
Communication will be more effective if we “accept” instead of “expect” and “discuss” instead of “dismiss”. My effort is to have a continuous dialogue with the youth in various programmes or through social media. I try to learn from whatever they are doing or whatever they are thinking. They are storehouse of ideas. They are extremely energetic, innovative and focused. I try to share the efforts and achievements of the youth as much as possible through “Mann Ki Baat”. There is a general complaint that the younger generation asks too many questions. I say it is good that the youth ask questions.
It is good as it shows that they want to analyse everything from its very root. Some people say that the youth do not have patience but my belief is that the youth do not have any time to waste- this is the point which helps the present day youth become more innovative because they want to accomplish things quickly. We feel that the youths are very ambitious today and they plan big. I feel it is good, dream big and achieve bigger successes; after all, this is “the New India”. Some people say that the younger generation wants to accomplish a many things at a time. I say what is wrong in it. They do so because they are adept in multitasking. If we just look around, we find that it is the youth who are bringing in transformation of society in a big way, may it be social entrepreneurship, start-ups, sports or any other field. Those youth who have dared to ask questions and have had the courage to dream big. If we put these ideas of our youthinto practice and provide them conducive environment to express themselves, they surely will bring about a constructive and a positive change in the country- they are already doing so.
My dear countrymen, Vineeta ji from Gurugram- has posted on MyGov that in Mann Ki Baat I should talk about the “Constitution Day” which falls on the26th November. She says that this day is special because we are going to enter into the 70th year of our Constitution adoption. Thank you very much for your suggestion Vineeta ji.
Yes, tomorrow is the Constitution Day. A day to remember those great personalities who drafted our Constitution. Our Constitution was adopted on 26th November, 1949. The Constituent Assembly took 2 years 11 months and 17 days to accomplish this stupendous task of drafting the Constitution. Just imagine, these luminaries gave us such a comprehensive and detailed Constitution within a period of just less than 3 years. The extraordinary pace at which they drafted the Constitution is an example of Time Management and productivity to emulate even today. This also inspires us to accomplish our responsibilities within a record time. The Constituent Assembly was an amalgamation of the great talents of the country, each one of them was committed to provide a Constitution to the country which empowers the people of India and enriches even the poorest of the poor.
The unique point in our Constitution is that the rights and duties have been very comprehensively detailed. A balance between these two in the lives of our citizens will take our nation forward. If we respect the rights of others, our rights will automatically get protected and similarly if we fulfill our duties, then also our rights will get automatically protected. I still remember that in 2010 when 60 years of the adoption of the Constitution were being celebrated, we had taken out a procession by placing our Constitution atop an elephant. This has been a memorable incident to increase awareness about our Constitution among the youth and to connect them to the various aspects of the Constitution. In the year 2020, we shall complete 70 years as a Republic and in 2022, we shall enter 75th year of our Independence.
Let us all take forward the values enshrined in our Constitution and ensure Peace, Progress and Prosperity in our country.
My dear countrymen, while talking about the Constituent Assembly, the contribution of that great man cannot be forgotten who played a pivotal role in the Constituent Assembly. This great man was none other than our revered Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar. His death anniversary or mahaparirvan divas falls on 6th December. I, on behalf of all countrymen, pay my homage to Baba Saheb who gave the right to live with dignity to crores of Indians. Democracy was embedded deep in Baba Saheb’s nature and he used to say that India’s democratic values have not been imported from outside. What is a republic and what is a parliamentary system- are nothing new to India. He had made a very moving appeal in the Constituent Assembly that we have to safeguard our hard fought democracy till the last drop of our blood. He also used to say that we, Indians may be from different background but, yes, we shall have to keep the national interest above all the other things. “India First” was the basic doctrine of Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar. Once again my humble tribute to revered Baba Saheb.
My dear countrymen, two days back on 23rd November, we all celebrated Shri Guru Nanak Dev Jayanti and next year in 2019 we shall be celebrating his 550th Prakash Parv. Guru Nanak Dev Ji always envisaged the welfare of entire humanity. He always showed the path of truth, work, service, kindness and amity to the society. The country will observe Guru Nahak Dev Ji’s 550th birth anniversary in a grand way, its soothing colours will not only spread in India alone but will get sprinkled the world over. All states and Union Territories have been requested to celebrate the occasion in a grand manner. Guru Nanak Dev Ji’s 550th Prakash Parv will be celebrated in a similar manner in all the countries of the world as well. Besides, a train will be run on a route joining all the holy places connected with Guru Nanak Dev ji. Recently, while holding a meeting in this regard I remembered about of Lakhpat Saheb Gurudwara. This Gurudwara suffered severe damage due to the devastating earth quake of 2001 in Gujarat. But, the manner in which the local people joined hands with the state Government in renovating it, is an example even today.
The Government of India has taken a significant decision of building Kartarpur corridor so that our countrymen could easily visit Kartarpur in Pakistan to pay homage to Guru Nanak Dev Ji at that holy sight.
My dear countrymen, we shall meet once again in the next episode after this 50th episode of Mann Ki Baat and I am sure that in this episode of Mann Ki Baat today I got an opportunity for the first time to talk to you about the spirit behind this programme because of your questions. But our journey shall continue. The more you connect with us, our journey will gain greater depth, providing, satisfaction to one and all. At times a question arises in the minds of people’s as to what I achieved through Mann Ki Baat. I would like to say today that of the feedback of this programme, one of the points that touches my heart most- is when people tell me that when we sit with all our family members to listen to Mann Ki Baat, we feel that the head of our family is sitting with us and sharing his ideas with us. When I heard this comment in a larger circle, I felt satisfied to know that I am yours, I am one amongst you, I am with you, you elevated me and in a way, and in this way I will continue to remain connected with you as a family member through Man Ki Baat. Your joys and sorrows are my joys and sorrows too; your expectations are my expectations also; your ambitions are my ambitions.
Come on, let us take this journey further.
Many many thanks.


50. DECEMBER 30, 2018
My Dear countrymen, Namaskar. The year 2018 is about to conclude. We shall soon enter 2019. At such a juncture, it is natural to reflect on the year gone by; it is equally so, to hear about resolutions for the year being ushered in. Whether it be the life of an individual, the life of a society at large or the life of a Nation collectively, everybody has to look back & ponder; at the same time one has to try & look forward to the best extent possible. Only then can the gains of experience be availed of, only then can one’s self-confidence renew further. What exactly should we do in order to ensure a change in our lives, simultaneously contributing our bit in taking our country & society forward? Many good wishes to all of you for the year 2019. You must have wondered how to keep 2018 etched in your memory! It is important to bear in mind HOW India as a country, as a collective entity powered by the might of a hundred & thirty crore people remembers the year 2018; something that swells our hearts with pride.
The year 2018 saw the launching of the world’s biggest health insurance scheme ‘Ayushman Bharat’. Electricity reached each & every village of the country this year. Noted world institutions have accepted that the country has taken strides in the area of poverty alleviation at a record pace. On account of the unwavering resolve of our countrymen, swachchata, sanitation coverage is rapidly advancing towards crossing the 95% mark.
After Independence, for the first time ever, the tricolor was hoisted at Red Fort on the 75th anniversary of the formation of the Azad Hind Government. In honour of SardarVallabhbhai Patel who bonded the entire country around a common thread of unity, India witnessed the coming up of the tallest statue in the world, ‘Statue of Unity’. The country secured a place of pride & glory in the entire world. The highest United Nations Environment Award ‘Champions of the Earth’ was conferred upon India. The world duly took notice of India’s efforts in the areas of Solar Energy & Climate Change. The first General Assembly of the International Solar Alliance was held in India. It is due to our collective efforts that our country has seen unprecedented improvement in the ‘Ease of doing business’ rankings. The country’s self defence mechanism got further reinforced. It was during this very year that our country has successfully accomplished the Nuclear Triad, which means we are now armed with nuclear capabilities-in water, on land and in the sky as well. Daughters of the country have done her proud by circumnavigating the globe through the NavikaSagarParikrama. India’s first inland waterway was launched in Varanasi. This has laid the foundation of a new revolution in the waterways sector. The longest rail-road bridge, Bogibeel Bridge was dedicated to the Nation- Sikkim’s first & India’s hundredth airport, Pakyong commenced operations. India scripted a thumping win in the under- 19 Cricket World Cup and the Blind Cricket World Cup. This time, India clinched a large number of medals in the Asian Games. India also performed very well in the Para Asian Games too. By the way, if I continue enumerating examples of the Purusharth, the character & the mettle of Indians, or those of our collective endeavour, this episode of Mann Ki Baat will go on and on, perhaps to the point when 2019 makes an entry! And all this has been possible due to the relentless efforts of a 130 crore countrymen. I sincerely hope that India’s journey on the path of advancement & progress continues through 2019 too. Taking her to newer heights with her inner strengths.
My dear countrymen, this December we had to bear the loss of some extraordinary, exemplary countrymen. On the 19th of December, Dr. Jayachandran passed away in Chennai. People fondly called him ‘MakkalMaaruthuvar’ since he had a special place in their hearts. Dr. Jayachandran was known for his efforts of making the most economical treatment possible available to the poor. People tell us that he would be ever ready & eager, when it came to treatment of patients. In the case of elderly patients, he would even bear the cost of their travelling to and fro. On the betterindia.com website, I have read about many of his endeavours that serve as an inspiration to society.
On similar lines, on the 25th of December, I learnt of the loss of SulagittiNarsamma in Karnataka. SulagittiNarsamma was a midwife, aiding pregnant women during childbirth. In Karnataka, especially in far-off, remote places, thousands of women availed of her services. In the beginning of this year, she was honoured with a Padma Shri. There are many exemplary personalities such as Dr. Jaya Chandran and SulagittiNarsamma, who dedicated their lives to the welfare of all in society. Since we are referring to healthcare, I would like to mention the social endeavour of doctors in Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh. Recently, I was told by some of our party workers that a few young doctors in the town set up camps offering free treatment for the underprivileged. Every month, the Heart Lungs Critical Centre there organizes such camps, where free diagnosis and treatment for a host of ailments is done. Every month, hundreds of poor patients are benefitting from these camps. The dedication of these doctor friends engaged in selfless service is truly worthy of praise. Today, I’m saying it with pride that it was collective efforts that made the ‘Swachch Bharat Mission’ a successful campaign. I was told that a few days ago, in Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, over three lakh people came together to work for the sanitation campaign.
In this ‘Mahayagya’, grand undertaking, the Municipal Corporation, voluntary bodies, School- College students, the people of Jabalpur; in fact everyone participated with enthusiasm & Zest. I just referred to the betterindia.com, where I got to read about Dr. Jaya Chandran. Whenever I get the opportunity, I visit the better India website and try to know more about such shining, inspiring deeds. I am glad to observe that these days, there are many websites apprising us of inspiring life- stories of such remarkable gems. Just as thepoitiveindia.com is doing great work in spreading positivity and infusing more sensitivity into society. Similarly, success stories of young innovators & entrepreneurs are women beautifully on yourstory.com. In the same way, you can easily learn the Sanskrit language sitting at home through samskritabharati.in. Can we join hands in one endeavour?.. Let us share such websites amongst ourselves. Let’s come together to make positivity viral.
I do believe that by doing so more and more people will get to know about our heroes who brought a change in society. Spreading negativity is fairly easy. But some really good work is being done around us, in our society. And all this has been possible through the collective efforts of a 130 crore countrymen.
Sports has its own significance in every society. When a game is being played, the spectators too experience a rush of energy in their beings. We observe name, fame and laurels when it comes to sportspersons.  But, at times, in the background, there exist many things that are much higher, much greater than the world of sports. Let me tell you about one of our daughters from Kashmir who won a gold medal in a Karate Championship in Korea. Hanaya is 12 years old and lives in Anantnag, Kashmir. Hanaya trained hard in Karate with perseverance & fervor, studied its nuances and proved herself. On behalf of all countrymen, I wish her a bright future. Best wishes and blessings to Hanaya. Similarly, the media discussed extensively about the 16 year old Rajani. You too must have read it. Rajani has won a gold medal at the Junior Women’s Boxing Championship. The moment Rajani won the medal she rushed to a nearby milk stall & drank a glass of milk. After that, she wrapped a cloth around the medal & kept it in a bag. You must be wondering why Rajani did that ! She did it in honour of her father Jasmer Singh ji who sells lassi, at a stall in Panipat. According to Rajani, her father has sacrificed a lot, undergone hardships to help her reach where she is. Early every morning, Jasmer Singh used to leave for work before Rajani and her siblings woke up. When Rajani approached her father, expressing her wish to learn boxing, he encouraged her, arranging for whatever possible resources that he could. Rajani had to start her training in boxing with old gloves, since those days, the family was not too well, financially. Despite so many hurdles, Rajani did not lose heart & went ahead with her training in boxing. She has won a medal in Serbia too. My best wishes and blessings to Rajani. I also congratulate her parents Jasmer Singh ji and Usha Rani Ji for supporting & encouraging Rajani. This very month, 20 year old Vedangi Kulkarni from Pune became the fastest Asian to traverse the globe riding a bicycle. She rode for 159 days, covering around 300 kilometres every day. Just imagine… 300 kms of cycling every day ! Her passion for cycling is indeed commendable. Don’t news of such achievements, such accomplishments inspire us? Especially my young friends, when we hear about such feats, we derive inspiration to touch heights despite obstacles.
If your resolve is strong, if your fervor, your enthusiasm is without bounds, all your hurdles halt in their tracks. Hardships can never turn into obstacles. When we come to know of such examples, we too feel inspired every moment of our life.
My dear countrymen, the month of January ushers in many festivals filled with hope & joy- such as Lohri, Pongal, MakrSankranti, Uttarayan, MaghBihu, Maaghi; on the occasion of these festivities, the length & breadth of India will be replete… with the verve of traditional dances at places, the embers of Lohri symbolizing the joy of a bountiful harvest at others. Somewhere the skies dotted with colourful flying kites, elsewhere the funfilled air of a mela or carnival. The spirit of Sports & games will come to the fore… and at places, people will joyfully feed each other til&gur… sesame &jaggery… people will be heard exchanging the greeting phrase ‘Tilgurghyaaanigorgor bola’!
All these festivals may carry different names but the underlying or inherent feeling of celebrating them is singular – these are harvest festivals and somewhere or the other are connected with crops and farming, connected with the farmer, with the village and with our barns. It is during this period that the sun enters Uttarayan due to Northward movement of the earth on the celestial sphere and enters the Makardasha. It is during this period that days begin to lengthen and the winter harvesting of our crops begins. Best wishes to our food providers, the farming brothers and sisters.
Our festivals are replete with fragrance of the essence of Unity in Diversity and the spirit of One India Great India. We can witness how closely our festivals are interlinked with nature. In Indian culture society and nature are indistinguishable, in our culture the person and his environment are considered in totality. A great example of the interconnection between us and Nature is the calendar based on our festivals. It comprises festivals all around the year as well as the movements of the celestial bodies. This traditional calendar depicts our bonding with natural and astronomical events. The lunar and solar Calendars based on the movement of earth with respect to moon and sun decide the occurrence and dates of our festivals. It is also dependant on the fact which calendar you follow. In many regions the position of the planetary constellations determines the occurrence and celebration of festivals. GudiPadva, Chettichand, Ugadi and others are all celebrated according to the lunar Calendar, whereas Tamil PutanduVishnu, Baisakh, Baisakhi, PoilaBoisakh, Bihu are all celebrated in accordance with solar calendar.
The sagacity of conserving rivers and water is inherently reflected in many of our festivals. Chhath festival is associated with the worship of the sun, rivers and ponds. Millions of people take a dip in the holy rivers on theoccasion of MakarSankranti. Our festivals, impart to us many social values. On the one hand, where they have mythological significance, on the other, every festival quite easily in itself teaches the important lesson of life – the value of staying together, imbued with a feeling of brotherhood. I wish all of you a great  year 2019 and do hope that you all to enjoy the oncoming festive season. Doo share the photographs taken on these festivals with one another so that everyone can witness the diversity of India and the beauty of Indian culture.
My dear countrymen, there is an abundance of events in our culture, of which we can be proud and display them in the entire world with pride – and one of them is the Kumbh Mela. You must have heard a lot about Kumbh. Even in films, a lot is exhibited regarding its grandeur and magnificence and most truly so, the dimensions ofKumbh are vast – supremely divine, as much magnificent. People from all over the country and around the world come and participate in the Kumbh. In the Kumbh Mela, there is a tidal upsurge of faith and reverence. Millions and millions of people from India and around the world congregate at one place.
The tradition of Kumbh has bloomed and flourished as part of our great cultural heritage. This time the world famous Kumbh Mela is going to be held in Prayagraj from January 15,  and many of you might be waiting eagerly for it to take place. The process of Sant- Mahatmas converging at the Kumbh Mela has already started. It is a measure of its global importance that last year UNESCO has marked Kumbh Mela in the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. A few days ago the Ambassadors of many countries witnessed for themselves the preparations for Kumbh. The national flags of many countries were together hoisted at the Kumbh. The festival of Kumbh, to be organized in Prayagraj, is expected to have footfalls from more than 150 countries; the divinity emanating from Kumbhwill spread the colours of India’s splendour throughout the world.
Kumbh Mela is also a huge medium of self discovery, where every visitor experiences a unique feeling and learns to look at the worldly things from a spiritual perspective. This can be a huge learning experience especially for the youth. I myself went to Prayagraj a few days ago and saw that the preparations for the Kumbh were progressing on a war footing. People of Prayagraj are also very enthusiastic  about the Kumbh. I inaugrated the Integrated Command & Control Center at the Kumbh which will be of great benefit to the devotees.
This time much emphasis is being laid on cleanliness during Kumbh. If during the course of this event sanitation prevails along with reverence, then it will lead to a positive message reaching far and wide. This time every devotee will be able to have a darshan of the pious Akshayavat after the holy dip in the confluence. This great symbol of people’s faith was locked up in the fort for hundreds of years, due to which the devotees despite a deep seated desire could not get a glimpse of. Now the entrance gate of  Akshayavat have been opened for everyone. I urge all of you to share different aspects of Kumbh and photos on social media when you go to Kumbh so that more and more people feel inspired to go to Kumbh.
May this Kumbh of Spirituality become Mahakumbh of Indian Philosophy.
May this Kumbh of faith also become Mahakumbh of ofnationalism.
And a Mahakumbh of National integration
May this Kumbh of the devotees also become Mahakumbh of global tourists.
May this Kumbh of aesthetics also become the Mahakumbh of creativity.
My dear countrymen, there is a lot of curiosity regardingthe celebration of RepublicDay on 26th January, when we remember those great men who gave us our Constitution.This year we are celebrating the 150th birth anniversary of revered Bapu. We are fortunate that South African President Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa is going to grace the Republic Day celebrations as chief guest. Our revered Bapu and South Africa shared an unbreakable bond. It was South Africa, where Mohan transformed into the ‘Mahatma’. It was in South Africa, where Mahatma Gandhi had started his first Satyagraha and stood rock steady in protest of apartheid. He also founded the Phoenix and Tolstoy Farms, from where the demand for peace and justice echoed to the whole world. The year2018 is also being celebrated as Birth centenary of Nelson Mandela,also known as ‘Madiba’. We all know that Nelson Mandela was the role model of struggle against racism all over the world and who was the inspiration for Mandela? He derivedinspiration and endurancefor spending many years in jail from Bapu himself. Mandela said this about Bapu – “Mahatma is an integral part of our history, because it was here that he used his first experiment with truth; It was here, That he had displayed a great deal of determination for justice; It was here,  he developed the philosophy of his satyagraha and his methods of struggle. “Mandela used to consider Bapu as his role model. Both Bapu and Mandela are not only sources of inspiration for the entire world, but their ideals have always encouraged us to create a society full of love and compassion.
My dear countrymen, a few days ago, a DGP conference was held at Kevdia on the banks of Narbada in Gujarat, where the world’s highest statue ‘Statue of Unity’ is situated, there I had a meaningful discussion with the top policemen of the country. What kind of steps should be taken to strengthen the security of the country and that of the countrymen, was discussed in detail. At the same conference, I also announced the awarding of ‘Sardar Patel Award’ for National Integration to be given to those who have contributed for national unity in any form. Sardar Patel dedicated his entire life for the unity of the country. He  always remained engaged in keeping India’s integrity intact. SardarSaheb believed that the power of India lay in the diversity of the land. It is our way of paying homage to Sardar Patel’s aspirations through this award for National Integration.
My dear countrymen, January 13 is the date ofthe  sacred festival observed in honour of Guru Gobind Singh ji’s birth anniversary. Guru Gobind Singh Ji was born in Patna. For most of his life, his work was centred in North India and he sacrificed his life in Nanded, Maharashtra. His birthplace was Patna, Karmabhoomi was north India and the last moments were spent in Nanded. In a way, entire India received his blessings. A glimpse of his life span reflects a glimpse of the entire India. After the martyrdom of his father Shri Guru TeghBahadurji, Guru Gobind Singh Ji attained the hallowed position of the Guru at a tender ageof nine years. Guru Gobind Singh ji had inherited courage to fight for justice from the legacy of Sikh Gurus. He was bestowed with a quiet and simple personality, but whenever, an attempt was made to suppress the voice of the poor and the weak, or injustice was done to them, then Guru Gobind Singh ji raised his voice firmly for the poor and the weak and therefore it is said –
“I can make one fight against one hundred and fifteen thousands,
I can make the sparrow fight against the hawk
That be the reason that Gobindsingh be my name.”
He used to preach that strength cannot be demonstrated by fighting against the weaker sections. Shri Gobind Singh Ji believed that the biggest service is to alleviate human suffering. He was a divine figure full of heroism, valor, courage, sacrifice and devotion. He had beatific knowledge of both weapons andShaastras. He was an archer, and a pundit of Gurmukhi, BrajBhasha, Sanskrit, Persian, Hindi and Urdu and many other languages. I once again bow paying my obeisance to Shri Guru Gobind Singh ji.
My dear countrymen, there are many good events happening in the country, which are not widely discussed. Such a unique effort is being attempted by F.S.S.A.I viz Food Safety and Standard Authority of India. Many programs are being organized across the country in celebration of the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi. In this regard F.SA.A.I. is engaged in promoting good eating or Safe and Healthy Diet habits. Under the aegis of “Eat Right India” campaign, ‘Swasth Bharat’ trips are being carried out across the country. These campaigns will last till Jan 27th. At times, government organizations are tagged as a regulator, but it is commendable that F.SA.A.I has been working beyond this brief for public awareness and public education. A clean and healthy India will spell a prosperous India also. Nutritious food is most essential for good health. In this context, I extend hearty greetings to F.S.S.A.I for this initiative. I urge you to the utmost, let’s join this initiative. You should participate in this initiative and especially I urge you to make you children witness these campaigns. The education regarding importance of food is essential right from childhood.
My dear countrymen, this is the last episode of the year 2018, we will meet again in 2019, and will engage in another episode of Mann Ki Baat. Whether it is the life of a person, life of a nation, or  the lifespan of a society, inspiration, is the basis of progress. Come, imbued with renewed inspiration, renewed zeal, renewed resolution, new accomplishments, loftier goals – let’s move on, keep moving, change oneself and change the country too.
Thank you very much.


51. JANUARY 27, 2019
My Dear Countrymen, Namaskar
On the 21st of this month, our Country received very sad news. Dr. Shri Shri Shri ShivaKumar Swamiji of District Tumukur, Karnataka was no more. ShivaKumar Swamiji dedicated his entire life to Social Service. Lord Basaveshwar has taught us, “Kayakave Kailas”” meaning discahrging one’s duties with due dilligence and persevereance is akin to being in the abode of Lord Shiva ie Kailasha Dham. ShivaKumar Swamiji was a true follower of this tenet … during his life spanning a hundred and eleven years, he strived tirelessly towards the social, educational and economic upliftment of thousands of people . He was renowned to be a masterly scholar of languages such as English, Sanskrit and Kannada. He was a social reformer. He dedicated his life in ensuring that food, shelter, education and spiritual knowledge reached out to people. The welfare of farmers was a priority in his life. The Siddhganga Mutt regularily used to organise cattle and agricultural fairs. I have had the fortunate opportunity to be blessed by Swamiji, many a time. In the year 2007 on the occasion of the Centenary celebration of Sri Sri Sri Shivakumar Swamiji our former President Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam had paid a visit to Tumukur. On this occasion Kalam Saheb had recited a poem dedicated to revered Swamiji.
I quote him:
“O my Fellow Citizens – In giving, you receive happiness,
In Body and Soul- You have everything to give,
If you have knowledge – share it,
If you have resources – share them with the needy,
You, your mind and heart.
To remove the pain and suffering, and cheer the sad hearts.
In giving, you receive happiness Almighty will bless, all your actions”
Dr. Kalam Saheb’s poem potrays the life of Shri Shri Shri Shivakumar Swamiji and the mission of the Siddhganga Mutt beautifully. Once again, I pay tribute to this great man.
My Dear Countrymen,
On the 26th of January, 1950, our Constitution came in to being; our Country was proclaimed a Republic. Yesterday, we celebrated Republic Day with pride and fervour. But today I want to speak to you on a totally different aspect. Our Country possesses a very important institution; besides being an integral part of our democracy, it is even older than our Republic – I am referring to our Election Commission. The 25th of January was the Formation Day of the Election Commission, which is celebrated now as the National Voters’ Day. The scale at which elections are held in India is a matter of great awe for the World. It is natural for every Citizen to feel proud of the Election Commission of its meticulous organising abilities. Our Country leaves, no stone unturned to ensure that every citizen of India who is a registered voter, rightfully avails of the opportunity to cast his vote.
Whereas we hear of a polling station at 15,000 feet above mean sea level in Himachal Pradesh we also learn about the same being organised in remote islands of the Andaman Nicobar archipelago. And you must have heard about Gujarat … in a remote place in Gir forest, there is a polling booth for a sole voter. Just imagine … for that one and only voter! These facts are bound to instil a sense of pride, of the commitment of the Election Commission. Caring for that lone voter, for ensuring that he or she enjoys full opportunity to exercise the right to vote, personnel of Election Commission travel to distant remote places to make necessary arrangements for the voting.  This is the beauty of our democracy.
I appreciate the Election Commission for relentlessly striving to ensure the strengthening of our democracy. I hold in high esteem, the Election Commissions of all states, security personnel and other staff members who contribute in ensuring strict adherence to free and fair polling.
This year, our Country will undergo Lok Sabha elections. The first time ever, young persons born in the 21st Century will exercise their Right to Vote in the Lok Sabha Elections. They face the opportunity to shoulder responsibilities pertaining to the Country. They have embarked upon the journey of being partners in Nation building. The time has come for a confluence of individual dreams and the Nation’s dream. I urge the young generation to register themselves as voters, if they are eligible. All of us must realise that being a voter, earning the right to vote is an important rite of passage in one’s life; it’s one of its achievements. Simultaneously, the sentiment that voting is our sacred duty, should grow within us naturally. For any reason, if one is not able to vote, it should pain one. One should be saddened to witness any wrong taking place in the country.
“I had not cast my vote … that day I did not go and vote … and as a result, my Country has borne the brunt “. We have to realise the importance of this responsibility of ours. This must be our leaning; this should be our disposition. This inclination should be ingrained within us like a sanskaar. I urge eminent people of the country to come forward and jointly contribute in campaigning for spreading awareness on voter registration and casting one’s vote on the day of polling. I sincerely hope that large numbers of eligible young people will get themselves registered as voters, thus forging a partnership in the quest to further strengthen our democracy.
My Dear Countrymen,
This great land, India, has given birth to innumerable great men, men whose deeds for the sake for humanity have been extraordinary, truly unforgettable. Our country is ‘Bahuratna vasundhara’ … the land of myriad gems. One among them was Netaji Subash Chandra Bose. On the 23rd of January, the country celebrated the birth anniversary of Netaji in an uncommon, special manner. On this occasion I was fortunate to get an opportunity to inaugurate a museum dedicated to heroes who fought in India’s freedom struggle. You may be aware of the fact that inside Red Fort, many chambers and structures lay locked & unused for several decades after Independence. Those very chambers have now been turned into exquisite museums. A museum dedicated to Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose and the Indian National Army; Yaad-e-Jalian, reminiscences of Jalianwala Bagh and 1857 – India’s first war of Independence constitute the premises of ‘Kranti Mandir’, that has been dedicated to the nation. Every inch, every brick of these museums is redolent with the fragrance of our glorious history. Tales of valour of the heroes of our freedom struggle emanating from every nook & corner of these museums inspire us to delve deeper into our history. This was the very site where three heroic sons of Mother India – Col. Prem Sehgal, Col. Gurbaksh Singh Dhillon and Major General Shahnawaz Khan had to face a trial under British Rule.
On my visit to Kranti Mandir, Red Fort, as I was reflecting on memories of Netaji, his family members gifted me a special cap. There was a time when Netaji used to wear it.  I dedicated that cap to the museum itself, for visitors to see and be inspired with the spirit of patriotism. The fact is, stories of the valour and patriotism of our heroes should be told and re-told to our newer generations in ways more than one.  Just a month ago, on the 30th of December, I had gone to Andaman & Nicobar islands. At an event, our tricolour was unfurled at the very site where Netaji Subhash Bose had unfurled it exactly 75 years ago. In a similar manner, when the tricolour was hoisted at the Red Fort in October 2018, it surprised everyone, since conventionally, this is done on the 15th of August. The occasion was the completion of 75 years of the formation of the Azad Hind Government. Subhash Babu will always be remembered as a brave soldier and adept organiser; a valiant fighter who played a significant role in our Freedom Struggle. Through his clarion calls ‘Dilli Chalo’, ‘Tum mujhe Khoon do, main tumhe azadi doonga’, Netaji secured a special place in every Indian’s heart. That files associated with Netaji be declassified has been a long standing demand for years. And I am happy that we could manage to do the same. I remember the day when Netaji’s family paid a visit to the Prime Minister’s residence. We dwelt at length on myriad facets of Netaji Subhash Bose, offering him tributes.
It gladdens me to see many places associated with illustrious sons of India being developed in Delhi. Be it 26, Alipur Road, associated with Babasaheb Ambedkar, or the Sardar Patel museum or the Kranti Mandir! Whenever you come to Delhi, you must pay a visit to these places.
My dear countrymen, today as we refer to Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose, that too in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I would like to share with you an incident from Netaji’s life. I have always considered Radio as an effective means of connecting with people. Similarly, Netaji shared a deep bond with the medium of Radio and he chose this very medium to converse with countrymen.
In 1942, Subhash Babu established Azad Hind Radio and through it he used to communicate with soldiers of the Indian National Army and other countrymen. Subhash Babu had a distinct style of opening a broadcast. In the opening he would begin with, “This is Subhash Chandra Bose speaking to you over the Azad Hind Radio…”. These words instantly stirred up listeners with a rush of a new energy, a new fervour.
I am told this radio station also used to broadcast weekly news bulletins in English, Hindi, Tamil, Bangla, Marathi, Punjabi, Pashto & Urdu languages. In managing the affairs of this radio station, a resident of Gujarat M.R. Vyas ji played a vital role. Programmes broadcast over Azad Hind Radio were very popular amongst the populace. Their programmes were a major source of inspiration & strength to our freedom fighters.
In this very Kranti Mandir, a visual arts museum has been established. India’s art & culture has been portrayed here in a very attractive way. The museum has 4 historical exhibitions which display more than 450 paintings and artworks which are of three centuries vintage. Exquisite works of great artists such as Amrita Shergill, Raja Ravi Verma, Avanindranath Tagore, Gaganendranath Tagore, Nandalal Bose, Jamini Roy, Sailoz Mukherjee have been exhibited. And I also specially request you to visit the place and see for yourself the works of Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore ji.
Now you must be thinking that we are discussing art and here I’m talking about seeing Gurudev Tagore’s excellent works of art. You have probably known Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore till date as a writer and a musician. But I would like to tell you that Gurudev was also a painter. He had painted upon many themes. He did paintings of many animals and birds, he also painted many landscapes, and not only that he also tried to depict many human characters by etching them on canvas. And the most unique aspect was that Gurudev Tagore did not ascribe any name to most of his works. He believed that the person seeing his painting should comprehend the painting in totality, from his own perspective, understand the message imparted by him in the particularpainting. His paintings have been on display in European countries, in Russia and in America. I hope you will go  and see his paintings in the ‘Kranti Mandir.’
My dear countrymen, India is a land of saints. Our saints have conveyed the message of goodwill, equality and social empowerment through their thoughts and deeds. One such Saint was – Sant Ravidas. On 19th February we will observe Ravidas Jayanti. The couplets or ‘dohas’ of Sant Ravidas ji are very well-known. Sant Ravidas used to convey a profound message through the few lines of his couplet or ‘doha.’ He had said
“जाति-जाति में जाति है,
जो केतन के पात,
रैदास मनुष ना जुड़ सके
जब तक जाति न जात”
Which would translate something like this that if you were to peel the stem of the banana tree, there appear leaves underneath which form the psuedostem, one can go peeling the leaves forming the stem till there isn’t any tree left at all ! Similarly man has been divided into castes and the human in him has disappeared. Sant Ravidas proposed that if God was present in every human being, then it was not fair to categorize him on the basis of caste, creed and other sociological demarcations.
Guru Ravidas ji was born in the holy city of Varanasi. Sant Ravidas ji tried to explain the importance of labour and the worker throughout his life via his messages. It would not be wrong to say that he has illustrated to the entire world the real meaning of dignity of labour. He would say –
“मन चंगा तो कठौती में गंगा”
That is, if your heart is pure, then the Absolute master resides within your heart. Sant Ravidas ji has influenced people cutting across every segment and class of the social milieu whether it was the Maharana of Chittor or his Queen or Meerabai, everyone was his follower were followers. I once again bow in reverence to Sant Ravidas ji.
My dear countrymen, Kiran Sidar has written on MyGov that I should highlight the aspects of India’s space program and its future. He also wants me to request the students to take interest in the space programs and to think out of the box and inspire them to go beyond the frontiers of the sky- Kiran ji, I appreciate your thoughts and especially the message being imparted to our children.
A few days ago, I was in Ahmedabad, where I got the privilege of unveiling the statue of Dr. Vikram Sarabhai. Dr. Vikram Sarabhai has had an important role in India’s space program. Our space program has been possible due to innumerable young scientists of the country. We take pride in the fact that the satellites developed by our students and Sounding Rockets have reached space. On 24th January ‘KALAM SAT’ fashioned by our students had been launched. The Sounding Rockets made by Odisha university students have also created many records. The number of successful space missions attempted since the country’s independence till 2014 have been equal to those successfully completed in the past four years. We have also created a world record for launching 104 satellites simultaneously from the same spacecraft. We will soon register India’s presence on the moon through the Chandrayaan-2 campaign.
Our country is also using Space Technology in devices employed in saving assets and life. Whether it is cyclone, or rail and road safety, all of these safety measures are being augmented by Space Technology. Among our fishermen, NAVIC devices are being distributed, which contribute in their economic development as well as ensure their safety. We are using Space Technology to improve delivery and accountability of government services. “Housing for all” or the “House for everyone” scheme involves geo-tagging of about 40 lakh homes spread over 23 states. Along with this scheme, about thirty and a half million properties under MNREGA have also been tagged. Today our satellites are a symbol of the country’s growing might. It has contributed a great deal in fostering better relations with many countries of the world. South Asia Satellites has been a unique initiative, which has also gifted hues of development to our neighbouring Allies. Through its highly competitive launch services, India today not only propels satellites of developing countries but also those of developed nations. The sky and stars have always enthralled children. Our Space Program provides an impetus to the children to think big and reach across those boundaries, which were considered impossible till today. It is a vision to inspire the children to discover new stars, while gazing at them!
My dear countrymen, I always say, those who play, also bloom and this time, many young players making their debut have bloomed in ‘Khelo-India’. In January about 6,000 players participated in 18 disciplines in the Khelo India Youth Games held in Pune. Only when the local ecosystem of our sports will be strong i.e. only when our base will be strong, then only our youth will be able to perform their best in the country and across the world. When the player performs his best at the local level,only then, he also shines globally. This time in ‘Khelo India’, participants from every state have performed well at their individual level. The life of many a medal winner is also immensely inspiring.
I was reading that young Akash Gorkha who won a silver medal in boxing had his father, Ramesh Ji working as a watchman in a complex in Pune. They live in a parking shed with their family. The captain of Maharashtra Under-21 Women’s Kabaddi team, Sonali Helvi is from Satara. She lost her father at a very young age, and her brother and mother encouraged the talent and skills of Sonali.
It is often seen that girls are not encouraged much to participate in sports such as Kabaddi. In spite of the hurdles, Sonali not only chose Kabaddi but excelled in this discipline. 10-year-old Abhinav Shaw hailing from Asansol is the youngest gold medallist in the Khelo India Games. A farmer’s daughter, Akshaya Basavani Kamat, from Karnataka won a gold medal in weightlifting. She credited her victory to her father, a farmer in Belgaum. When we talk about the creation of a New India, then determination exhibited by our youth is the veritable example of what is New India! These inspiring stories from the annals of ‘Khelo India,’ are ample proof , that the building of New India does not only involve contribution from the denizens of big cities but also from the youth, children, young sports talents, hailing from small cities, towns and villages.
My dear countrymen, you must have heard about many a prestigious beauty contest. But have you heard about the ‘Shining Toilet’ contest? Over the past month, more than 50 lakh toilets have participated in this unique contest. The name of this unique contest is “Clean beautiful Toilet”. People are making their toilets clean and colourful, by having them painted and other rennovations, you will find lots of photos of such toilets participating in the “Clean beautiful Toilet” contest spread from Kanya Kumari to Kutchh till Kamrup on social media. I appeal to all the Sarpanchs and village heads to take a lead in this campaign in their respective Panchayats. And do share your “clean beautiful toilet” photos with me on #MylzzatGhar on social media.
Friends together, on October 2, 2014, we had embarked on a memorable journey together to clean our country and to get rid of open defecation. Due to the unequivocal support from the people of India, today India is moving towards liberation from defecation in the open much prior to October 2, 2019, so that we may pay our homage to Bapu on his 150th birth anniversary.
In this memorable journey of clean India, listeners have also contributed a lot to the ‘Mann Ki Baat’ forum and that is why I’m happy to share the fact that more than five lakh fifty thousand villages and 600 districts have declared themselves free of open defecation and sanitation coverage has crossed 98% limit in rural India whereas latrines have been provided to nearly nine crore households.
My younger friends, the days of examinations are approaching. Anshul Sharma, resident of Himachal Pradesh has written on MyGov that I should talk about examinations and Exam Warriors. Anshul ji, I thank you for raising this issue. Yes, for many families, the first part of the year is Exam Season. Students, their parents and teachers, all are engaged in tasks related to examinations.
I wish all the students, their parents and teachers all the best. I would have liked to discuss this topic at length in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of today, but you will be happy to know that just after a gap of two days, on January 29, at 11 am, in the ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’ program, I am going to interact with students from all over the country, and this time, along with the students, their parents and teachers are also going to be part of this program.And this time, students from other countries will also participate. In this ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’ program, I will touch upon a lot of things related to all the facets of examinations with my young friends, especially on the topic of stress free exams. I had urged people to send me their inputs and ideas with regard to this programme; and I am very happy that a large number of people are sharing their thoughts on MyGov. Some of these ideas and suggestions I will definitely put in front of you during the Town Hall program. You must also try to become a part of this program …… and through social media and Namo App, you can also see its live telecast.
My dear countrymen 30th January is the death anniversary of revered Bapu. At 11am the whole country pays homage to the martyrs. Wherever we are, we must pay two minutes tribute to our martyrs. Remember our revered Bapu and take a vow to fulfill the dreams of Pujya Bapu, to build a new India, and to fulfill our duties as a citizen – let us move forward with this resolution. Let us ensure this journey of 2019 remains successful. Many many felicitations and thanks to all of you


52. FEBRUARY 24, 2019
53. JUNE 30, 2019
54. JULY 28, 2019
55. AUGUST 25, 2019
56. SEPTEMBER 29, 2019
57. OCTOBER 27, 2019
58. NOVEMBER 24, 2019
59. DECEMBER 29, 2019
60. JANUARY 26, 2020
61. FEBRUARY 23, 2020
62. MARCH 29, 2020
63. APRIL 26, 2020
64. MAY 31, 2020
65. JUNE 28, 2020
66. JULY 26, 2020
67. AUGUST 30, 2020
68. SEPTEMBER 27, 2020
69. OCTOBER 25, 2020
70. NOVEMBER 29, 2020
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar! I want to share a good news with you all at the beginning of Mann ki Baat today. Every Indian will be proud to know that a very old idol of Devi Annapurna is returning to India from Canada. This idol was stolen from a temple of Varanasi and smuggled out of the country around 100 years ago somewhere around 1913. I express my gratitude to the Government of Canada and to all those for this large heartedness who made this propitious deed possible. Mata Annapoorna has a very special relationship with Kashi. Now the coming back of her Idol is pleasing for all of us. Just like the idol of Mata Annapurna, a lot of our invaluable heritage has suffered at the hands of International gangs. These gangs sell them at a very high price in the international market. Now not only are they being subjected to heavy restrictions; India has also increased her efforts for their return. Because of such efforts, India has been successful in bringing back lots of such idols and artifacts in the past few years.There is a coincidence attached with the return of the idol of Mata Annapurna… World Heritage Week was celebrated only a few days ago. World Heritage Week provides a wonderful opportunity to the lovers of culture to revisit the past and to know about the history of these important milestones. In spite of these times of corona, this time, we saw people celebrate this Heritage week in an innovative manner. Culture helps a lot during crisis, plays a major role in handling it. Even with the help of technology, culture works like an emotional recharge. Today, lots of museums and libraries in the country are working to make their collection fully digital. In Delhi, our National museum has made some commendable efforts in this respect. National museum is working on introducing around ten virtual galleries- isn’t this interesting! Now, sitting at your home, you can tour National Museum galleries of Delhi. On the one hand it is important to take cultural heritage to the maximum number of people through the medium of technology, the use of technology is also important for the conservation of this heritage. Recently I was reading about an interesting project. There is an island named Svalbard in the north of Norway. A project,Arctic World Archive has been set upon this island. Invaluable heritage data has been stored in this archive in such a manner that no natural or man made disaster can affect it. Just recently,we have received information that the heritage of Ajanta caves is also being digitized and preserved in this project. A full view of the caves of Ajanta shall be on display in this. Along with the digitalized and restored painting, it shall also have important documents and quotes related to it. Friends, the pandemic has on the one hand changed our ways of working; on the other it has provided us with an opportunity to experience nature in a new manner. Our perspective in observing nature has also undergone a change. We are now stepping into the winter season. We will get to see myriad hues of nature. For the past few days Internet is full of viral pictures of Cherry Blossoms. You might be thinking that when I am referring to Cherry Blossoms I am talking about Japan’s distinct identity but it’s not like that. These are not pictures of Japan. These are pictures of Shillong of our Meghalaya. These cherry blossoms have further enhanced the beauty of Meghalaya.
Friends,
this twelfth of November marked the commencement of the 125th birth anniversary celebrations of Dr. Salim Ali ji. Dr. Salim has done illustrious work in the field of bird watching – the avian world. This has also attracted bird watchers of the world towards India. I have always been an ardent admirer of people who are fond of bird watching. With utmost patience, for hours together from morn to dusk, they can do bird watching, enjoying the scenic beauty of nature; they also keep passing on the knowledge gained to us. In India too, many bird watching societies are active. You too should connect yourselves with this subject. Amid the hectic routine of my life, recently in Kevadia, I alsogot a memorable opportunity to spend time with birds. Time spent among birds will bond you closer to nature, it will also inspire you towards the environment.
My dear countrymen,
India’s culture and Shaastras, knowledge has always been a centre of attraction for the entire world. Many people came to India to discover & study them & stayed back for ever, whereas some of them returned to their respective countries as carriers of this culture. I got an opportunity to know about the work of Jonas Masetti, also known as Vishwanath. Jonas teaches Vedanta & Geeta to people in Brazil. He runs an institution named Vishwavidya, situated in the hills of Petropolis, an hour’s distance from Rio De Janeiro. Jonas, after studying Mechanical Engineering worked in his stock market company. Later he was drawn towards Indian culture, especially Vedanta. From stocks to spirituality, it has truly been a long journey for him. Jonas studied Vedanta Philosophy in India, staying at Arsha Vidya Gurukulam in Coimbatore for four years. Jonas has another specialty- he is using technology to propagate his message. He regularly conducts online programmes. He also does a daily podcast. During the last seven years, through his free open courses on Vedanta, Jonas has taught over a lakh & a half students. Jonas is not only doing great work – he is doing it through a language understood by a large number of people. People are much keen on knowing how this could be of help to them during these times of Corona & quarantine. Through the medium of Mann Ki Baat, I congratulate Jonas on his efforts & wish him well for his future endeavors.
Friends,
similarly, one piece of news might have caught your attention. Newly elected MP in New Zealand Dr. Gaurav Sharma took the Oath of office in one of the ancient languages of the world – Sanskrit. The dissemination of Indian culture on part of an Indian fills us with pride. Through the medium of Mann Ki Baat, I extend best wishes to Gaurav Sharma ji. All of us wish he attains newer achievements in the service of the people of New Zealand.
My dear countrymen,
tomorrow on the 30th of November, we shall celebrate the 551st Prakash Parv, birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev ji. The world over, the influence of Guru Nanak Dev ji is distinctly visible.
From Vancouver to Wellington, from Singapore to South Africa his messages are heard all around. It is mentioned in Guru Granth Sahib –“sevak ko seva bun aayee”, that is the work of a sevak, a servant is to serve. In the past few years at many important junctures we had the opportunity to serve as a Sevak. Guru Sahib awarded us the opportunity to serve. 550th Prakash Parva of Guru Nanak Dev ji, 350th Prakash Parv of Shri Guru Govind Singh ji, next year we will have 400th Prakash Parv of Shri Guru Teg Bahadur ji too. I feel that I have been specially blessed by Guru Sahib that he has associated me very closely with his work.
Friends,
do you know that there is a Gurudwara, Lakhpat Gurudwara Sahib, in Kutch.Shri Guru Nanak ji had stayed at Lakhpat Gurudwara Sahib during his Udaasi, his spiritual travels. During the 2001 earthquake this Gurudwara too faced damage. It was the blessings of Guru Sahib that I was able to ensure its restoration. Not only was the renovation done; its glory and grandeur were restored too. All of us were bestowed with ample blessings of Guru Sahib. The restoration efforts of Lakhpat Gurudwara were honored with the Award of Distinction by the UNESCO Asia Pacific Heritage Award in 2004. The jury that gave away the award found that during the restoration, the fine details of the art and architecture were given special care. The jury also noted that in the restoration of the Gurudwara not only did the Sikh community participate actively; it was done under their guidance too. I had the good fortune of visiting Lakhpat Gurudwara when I was not even the Chief Minister. I used to feel immensely energized being there. Everyone feels blessed on visiting this Gurudwara. I feel very grateful that Guru Sahib has granted me the opportunity to serve regularly. Opening of the Kartarpur Sahib corridor in November last year was historic. I will cherish this lifelong in my heart. It is the good fortune of all of us that we got the opportunity to serve Shri Darbaar Sahib once more. It has now become easier for our Sikh brothers and sisters abroad to send contributions in the service of Darbaar Sahib. With this step, the Sangat, the followers all over the world have come closer to Darbaar Sahib.
Friends ,
it was Guru Nanak Dev ji who started the tradition of Langar and we saw how the Sikh community all over the world continued the tradition of feeding people during this period of Corona , served humanity – this tradition always keeps inspiring us. I wish we all keep working as a Sevak. May Guru Sahib keep taking services from me and countrymen in the same manner. Once again, many best wishes on Guru Nanak Jayanti.
My dear countrymen,
in the past few days I had the opportunity to interact with students of several universities across the country and be a part of important events in their journey of education. Through technology I was able to connect with students of IIT- Guwahati, IIT-Delhi, Deendayal Petroleum University of Gandhinagar, JNU of Delhi, Mysore University and Lucknow University. To be amongst the youth of the country is extremely refreshing and energizing. University campuses in a way are like Mini India. In these campuses on the one hand we see the diversity of India; on the other we also find great passion for changes for a New India. Before Corona when I used to go for a face to face event at any institution, I would urge that poor students from nearby schools to be invited to the function. Those children have been attending the functions as my special guests. When a small child in the grand function watches a young person becoming a Doctor, Engineer, Scientist, sees someone receiving a medal, new dreams awaken in the child- ‘I too can do it’, this self confidence arises. There is inspiration for resolve.
Friends,
besides this, I am always interested in knowing who the alumni of the institution are, what the arrangements by the institution for regular engagement with its alumni are,how vibrant their alumni network is.
My young friends, you are a student of an institution only till you study there, but you remain an alumni of that institution lifelong.
After leaving school or college, two things never end – one, the influence of your education, and second, your bonding with your school or college. Whenever alumni interact with each other, in their memories of school or college, greater time is given to reminiscing about time on campus and moments spent with friends than about books and studies, and, from these memories, a feeling is bornto do something for the institution.
What can bring greater happiness than to lend a hand in development of the place where your personality was moulded? I have read certain such efforts, where the former students have given back to their old institutions in great measure. Nowadays, alumni are very active in this. IITians have provided their institutions many facilities like Conference Centres, Management Centres& Incubation Centres set up by their efforts. All of these endeavors improve the learning experience of the current students. IIT Delhi has initiated an endowment fund, which is a brilliant idea. There is a culture of such endowments inrenowned universities across the world, which helps the students. I think that universities of India are also capable to institutionalize this culture.
When it comes to returning something, nothing can be deemed big or small. Even the smallest help matters. Every effort is important. Often, alumni play a very important role in technology upgradation of their institutions, in construction of buildings, in initiating awards and scholarships and in starting programs for skill development. The old student associations of certain schools have started mentorship programmes. In these programmes, they guide the students of different batches and also discuss educational prospects. Alumni associations are robust in many schools, especially in boarding schools, where they organize activities like sports tournaments and community service.
I would like to urge former students to keep consolidating their bonding with the institution in which they have studied!Whether it is at the level of school, college, or university. I also urge the institutions to work on new and innovative ways of alumni engagement and develop creative platforms so that alumni can be actively involved. A strong vibrant & active alumni network is needed not only in big Colleges and Universities but also in schools of our villages.
My dear countrymen,
the 5thDecember is the death anniversary of Sri Aurobindo. The more we read Sri Aurobindo, greater is the insight that we get. The more my young friends learn about SriAurobindo, greater will they learn about themselves, enriching themselves. The state of inner consciousness in which you are, where you are engaged in trying to achieve the many resolves, amid all this you will always find a new inspiration in Sri Aurobindo; you will find him showing you a new path!Just as at present when we are moving forward with the campaign ‘Vocal for Local’, Sri Aurobindo’s philosophy of Swadeshi shows us the path.
There is a very profound poemin Bangla.
‘Sui ChhutoPoy-Monto Ashe Tunga hote’.
Diya-ShalaiKathi, Tau aasepote ||
Pro-deeptiJaliteKhete, Shutee, Jethe.
KichhuteLokNoyaShadhiaan ||
That is, here, even the sewing needle and match stick come on a foreign ship! The people are not free even in eating, drinking, sleeping!
He also used to say that Swadeshi means that we give priority to the things made by our Indian workers and artisans. It is not that Sri Aurobindo ever opposed learning anything from abroad. Wherever there is anything new, we should learn from there and then support and encourage what can be good for our country-and that is the spirit of the Vocal for Local Mantra in the Atmanirbhar Bharat campaign. Especially what Shri Aurobindo opined about adopting Swadeshi should be read by every citizen today.
Friends,
likewise, Shri Aurobindo’s views on education were very lucid. He did not consider education to be limited only to bookish knowledge, degree and job. Sri Aurobindo used to say that our national education should focus on training of the hearts and minds of our younger generation, that is, scientific development of the mind and Indian ethos residein the heart should also be there, then only a young person can become a better citizen of the country. Whatever Shri Aurobindosaid about national education and expected then, the country is now achieving it through the new National Education Policy.
My dear countrymen,
new dimensions are being added to agriculture and its related activities in India. The agricultural reforms in the past few days have also now opened new doors of possibilities for our farmers. The demands that have been made by farmers for years, that every political party, at some point or the other made the promise to fulfill, those demands have been met. After a lot of deliberation, the Parliament of India gave a legal formto the agricultural reforms. These reforms have not only served to unshackle our farmers but also given them new rights and opportunities. In just a short span of time, these new rights have begun to ameliorate the woes of our farmers. You too should know how Jitendra Bhoiji, a farmer from Dhule district in Maharashtra made use of the recently promulgated farm laws. Jitendra Bhoiji had sown corn and decided to sell his produce to traders for a right price. The total cost of the produce was fixed at approximately Rupees Three Lakh thirty two thousand. Jitendra Bhoi even received an advance of Rupees twenty five thousand. It had been decided that the outstanding amount would be cleared in fifteen days. However, later such circumstances developed, that he did not receive the remainder of his payment. Buy the crop from the farmer, keep the payment pending for months on end ; probably this was the long standing tradition that the buyers of corn were following. This continued for four months wherein Jitendra ji was not paid his dues. In this situation, the new farm laws that were passed in September came to his aid. Under this law, it was decided that all dues of the farmers should be cleared within three days of procurement, failing which, the farmer can lodge a complaint. Another notable aspect of this law is that the area Sub Divisional Magistrate (SDM) has to ensure grievance redressal of the farmer within one month. Now, with our farmer brother empowered with this law, his grievance had to be redressed ; consequently, he lodged a complaint and within days his outstanding payments were cleared. This correct and complete knowledge of the law became the strength of Jitendra ji. Whichever the field, correct knowledge, free from misconceptions and rumors can act as a force multiplier for every individual. Mohammad Aslam ji from Baran district in Rajasthan is working in a similar fashion to increase awareness among farmers. He is also the CEO of a farmer producer organization. Yes, you heard it right! – the CEO of a farmer producer organization.I hope this is heartwarming news for the CEOs of major companies – that farmers from far flung areas of the country are now also becoming CEOs of farmer organizations! Friends, Mohammad Aslam Ji has made a Whatsapp group comprising several farmers from his area. On this group everyday he shares updates with the farmers on prevalent prices at neighboring Mandis in the area. His own FPO also buys produce from farmers, hence, this effort of his also helps farmers in taking a decision.
Friends,
awareness beget spiritedness. Shri Virendra Yadav ji is one such farmer entrepreneur, who has influenced the lives of thousands through his awareness. Sometime ago, Virendra Yadav ji used to live in Australia. Two years ago, he came to India and now lives in Kaithal, Haryana. Just like others, the stubble in the fields was a big concern for him too. Work is being done on a massive scale to find the solution to this issue, however, today in Mann Ki Baat, I am especially mentioning Virendra ji because his efforts are different and show a new way forward. To find a solution to stubble, Virendra ji bought a Straw Baler machine to make bundles of straw. For this, he also received financial assistance from the Agricultural department. With this machine, he began to make bundles of stubble. After having made the bundles, he sold the stubble to agro energy plants and paper mills. You will be amazed to know that in just two years, Virendra ji has traded in stubble in excess of Rupees Two and a Half Crores and has earned a profit of approximately Rupees Fifty Lakhs. The benefit of thisalso accrues to the farmers of those fields from where Virendra ji sources his stubble. We have often heard of ‘waste to wealth’, however, this initiative is a unique example of earning money and righteous goodwill while finding a solution to the problem of stubble. To the youth, especially the lakhs of students who are studying agriculture, it is my request that they visit villages in their vicinity and talk to the farmers and make them aware about innovations in farming and the recent agricultural reforms. This way, you will become stakeholders in major reforms underway in the country.
My dear countrymen,
in Mann Ki Baat, we refer to a wide range of issues and topics. However, it has been one year of one such incidentwe would never want to remember fondly. It has been roughly one year since the world came to know of the first case of Corona. Since then, the entire world has seen several ups and downs. Coming out of the lockdown now the discussion on a vaccine has commenced, however, any sort of negligence regarding Corona can be deadly even now. We have to firmly keep fighting against Corona.
Friends,
Baba Saheb Ambedkar’s Punya Tithi, death anniversary is in a few days from now on the 6th of December. Besides paying our homage to Baba Saheb, this day is also an occasion to reaffirm our resolve to the country and abiding by the duties, assigned to us by the Constitution as an individual. A large part of the country is also witnessing the onset of winter. Many areas are experiencing snowfall. In this weather, we must take care of the children and elders in the family, especially the ailing and take precautions ourselves too. It gives me joy to see people assisting the needy around them ; helping them with warm clothing.Winter brings many problems for destitute animals too and many people come forward to their aid. Our young generation takes active part in such initiatives. Friends, the next time when we meet in Mann Ki Baat, the year 2020 will be drawing to a close. With new hopes and faith, we will move forward. Whatever suggestions or ideas you may have now, do continue to keep sharing with me. My best wishes to all of you. May all of you stay healthy, stay active for the country.
Many Many thanks.


71. DECEMBER 27, 2020
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. Today is the 27th of December. Just four days later, 2021 is about to usher in. In a way, today’s Mann Ki Baat is the concluding Mann Ki Baat of 2020. The next Mann Ki Baat will commence in 2021. Friends, numerous letters written by you are there in front of me. The suggestions you sent on Mygov too are there. Many have expressed themselves over the phone. Most of the messages comprise experiences of the year gone by and resolutions for 2021. Anjali from Kolhapur has written that on New year, we offer greetings and good wishes to others …let us do something novel this time! Why don’t we greet our country; send best wishes to the country too! May our country touch newer heights in 2021… May India’s image in the world strengthen further…what could be a greater wish than this!
Friends,
Abhishek from Mumbai has posted a message on NAMO App. He has written that whatever 2020 revealed to us, taught us was unthinkable. He has written, on myriad aspects of CORONA. In these letters, in these messages, one common special factor that comes across to me is something that I would like to share with you. In most of the letters people have commended the country’s capabilities and the collective strength of the countrymen.  When a novel experiment such as Janta curfew became an inspiration for the whole world, when the country felicitated our corona warriors unitedly with Taali-thali, the applause and the reverberating chime of plates…..people have sent in reminiscences of that too.
Friends,
The most common amongst the common folk of the country has felt this transformation. I have witnessed an extraordinary ripple of hope in the country.  There came multiple challenges … many a crisis. On account of Corona, the world faced numerous hurdles in terms of supply chains…But we learn a new lesson with every crisis. The country was blessed with newer capabilities. Putting it into words…this capacity is termed as “Atmanirbharta”- Self Reliance.
Friends,
The experience that Abhinav Banerjee from Delhi has written to me is very interesting too. Abhinav ji wanted to buy some toys and gifts for children in the family….hence he had gone to Jhandewalan market in Delhi.
Many of you might be aware that this market in Delhi is known for bicycles and toys. Earlier even expensive toys there would mean imported ones; cheaper toys too would come in from elsewhere too. But Abhinav ji has mentioned in his letter that many shopkeepers are selling toys to customers emphasizing on the quality, saying those are better toys since they are Made In India. Customers too are demanding India made toys. Indeed, this is it- a big transformation in the mindset… this is living proof of the same. A huge change has begun in the minds of our countrymen…that too within a year. It is not easy to gauge this change. Even economists would not be able to assess it on their parameters.
Friends,
What Venkat Murli Prasad from Vishakhapatnam has written to me also contains an idea of an entirely different kind. Venkatji has written that he is attaching for me his ABC for 2021. I could not understand what he meant by ABC. Then I saw that Venkatji has attached a chart along with the letter. I glanced at the chart and realised what he meant by ABC…Atmanirbhar Bharat Chart. This is very interesting. Venkatji has prepared a list of all those items that he uses on a daily basis. It comprises electronics, stationery, self-care items besides many other things. Venkat ji has said that knowingly or unknowingly, we are using those foreign products whose substitutes are easily available in India. He has now vowed that he would use only that product that bears the mark of our countrymen’s toil and sweat.
Friends,
But along with this, he has also referred to something which I found pretty interesting. He has written that while we are supporting a self-reliant India, there should be a clear message for our manufacturers that they should not compromise on the quality of the products. What he says is right. This is the opportune moment to work with the ethos of ‘zero effect, zero defect’. I urge manufacturers and industry leaders of the country … people of the country have taken a firm step…moving a bold step forward…vocal for local is reverberating in each and every household….in such a scenario, it is time to ensure that our products meet global standards. Whatever is global best; we should make it in India and prove it. For that, our entrepreneur friends have to come forward. Startups too have to come forth. Once again, I congratulate Venkatji on his stellar effort.
Friends,
We have to cherish this sentiment…preserve it and keep nurturing it as well. I have said this earlier too…I once again urge countrymen…do prepare a list. Whatever items we use throughout the day…. analyse them ….think of things manufactured abroad that have permeated into our lives unknowingly, in a way, shackling us down. Let us find out their substitutes made in India. and decide that henceforth we shall use products made with the hard work and sweat of the people of India. You make New Year resolutions every year…this time one has to certainly make a resolution for the sake of the country.
My dear countrymen,
In order to protect our millennia old culture, civilization and traditions from the cruel misdemeanors of tyrants & tormentors many a supreme sacrifice was made…….It is a day to remember them too. On this day the sons of Guru Gobind Singh, Sahibzade Zorawar Singh and Fateh Singh were immured alive. The tyrants wanted Sahibzade to renounce their faith; abandon the teachings of the great Guru tradition. But, our Sahibzade showed amazing courage and determination even at that tender age.  During the immurement, as stones began piling up, gradually raising the height of the wall……. Death staring into the face…..despite that, they did not budge even a bit. It was on this day itself that Guru Gobind Singhji’s mother -Mata Gujari attained martyrdom. About a week ago, it was the Martyrdom Day of Shri Guru Tegh Bahadurji too. Here in Delhi, I was blessed with the opportunity to visit Gurudwara Rakabganj to offer floral tributes and pay my obeisance to Guru Tegh Bahadurji. During this very month, inspired by Shri Guru Gobind Singhji, many people sleep on the floor. People reminisce the supreme sacrifices made by family members of   Shri Guru Gobind Singhji with immense reverence.  This martyrdom served as a new beacon of learning for entire humanity; for the country. This martyrdom served towards the great deed of protecting our civilisation. We are indebted to this martyrdom. Once again I bow to the martyrdom of Shri Guru Tegh Bahadur ji, Mata Gujari, Guru Gobind Singhji and the four Sahibzade. Several such sacrifices have preserved the present fabric of India, keeping it intact.
My dear countrymen,
I am now going to tell you something that will gladden you and make you feel proud as well. In India, between 2014 and 2018, the number of leopards has risen by more than 60 percent. In 2014, the number of leopards in the country was about 7,900, whereas in 2019 it increased to 12,852. These are the very leopards about which Jim Corbett had said: “Those who have not seen a leopard wandering free in nature, cannot imagine its beauty…. cannot visualize the beauty of its colors and the charm of its gait.” In most parts of the country, especially central India, the number of leopards has risen. Amongst the states with the maximum population of leopards Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka and Maharashtra are topmost in the order. This is a big achievement for the year. Leopards, across the world have been facing dangers; their habitat has faced loss in the entire world. In such circumstances, the continued growth of the population of leopards in India has shown a way to the entire world.  You must also be aware that in the past few years, the population of lions in India has risen; the number of tigers too has increased. Also, there has been an increase in India’s forest area, the reason for this is that not only the government but also many people, civil society, many institutions too are engaged in conserving our trees and plants and wild animals. They all deserve accolades.
Friends,
I read about a heart-touching effort at Coimbatore in Tamilnadu. You too must have seen visuals of this on social media. We have seen wheelchairs for humans, but daughter Gayatri in Coimbatore, along with her father, made a wheelchair for a suffering dog. This sensitivity is inspiring and can happen only when a person is filled with kindness and compassion towards all life forms. In Delhi NCR and other cities of the country in the chilling cold many people are doing a lot for the care of shelterless animals.  They arrange for food, water, sweaters and even beds for those animals. Some people arrange food for hundreds of such animals every day. Such efforts should be commended. Several noble efforts are being undertaken in Kaushambi, Uttar Pradesh. There prison inmates are making covers from old and torn blankets to protect cows from the cold. Besides Kaushambi, these blankets are collected from jails of other districts and then they are sewn and sent to gaushaalas, cow shelters. Prisoners of Kaushambi are sewing several covers every week. Come, let us encourage such acts of care with a sense of service to others. In fact, this is a noble act that strengthens the sensitivity of the society.
My dear countrymen,
The letter that is in front of me now bears two large photographs. These are photos of a temple and depict ‘before’ and ‘after’. The letter which is with these photos talks about a team of youth which calls itself Yuva brigade. In fact, this Youth brigade has transformed an ancient Shiva temple named Veerbhadra Swami in Srirangpatna in Karnataka. All around in the temple there were widespread weeds and shrubs…so much that even travelers could not have recognized the existence of a temple there. One day, some tourists posted a video of this forgotten temple on social media. When the Yuva brigade saw this video on social media they could not bear it and this team decided to renovate it together. They removed the thorny bushes, grass and plants that had come up in the compound of the temple. They did repair and construction wherever required. Seeing their good deed, the local people too extended a helping hand. Some offered cement; others offered paint… people came up with many other such contributions.   All these youths belong to different professions.  Hence, they took out time during weekends and worked for the temple. They arranged for electricity connection too for the temple besides getting doors installed, thus restoring the old grandeur of the temple. Passion and firm commitment are two means through which people can achieve every goal. When I see the youth of India, I feel delighted and assured. Delighted and assured because the youth of my country has the ‘Can Do’ approach and the ‘Will Do’ spirit in them. No challenge is too big for them. Nothing is out of reach for them. I read about a teacher from Tamil Nadu.  Her name is Hemalata N. K., and she teaches the oldest language of the world Tamil at a school in Viddupuram. Even the Covid 19 pandemic could not create hurdles in her teaching work. Yes! Challenges definitely were there but she found out an innovative way. She recorded all the 53 chapters of the course, created animated videos, put them in a pen drive and distributed that amongst her students. Her students got a lot of help from this; they understood the chapters visually. Along with this, she kept interacting with her students telephonically. Thus, studies became quite interesting for the students. All over the country during this corona time, the innovative methods that the teachers have adopted, the course material they have creatively prepared, is invaluable in this period of online studies. I request all the teachers to definitely upload these course materials on the Diksha Portal of the Education Ministry. This will help students who are staying in far-flung areas of the country, a lot.
Friends,
Let us now talk of Hiramanji of Korwa tribe of Jharkhand. Hiramanji lives in the Sinjo village of Garhwa district. You will be amazed to know that the population of Korwa tribe is merely 6,000, which lives in hills and forests far away from cities. Hiramanji has taken up the task of preserving the culture and identity of his community. After an untiring toil of 12 years, he has created a dictionary of the Korwa language which is getting extinct. In this dictionary, he has written with meanings many Korwa words right from words used in the household to words used in daily life. What Hiramanji has done for the Korwa community is an example for the country.
My dear countrymen,
It is said that there was a prominent courtier in the court of Akbar named AbulFazl. After a visit to Kashmir, he once remarked that the place had one such scenic view that could uplift the mood of the most irritable and bad-tempered people, making them rejoice. In fact, he was referring to the saffron fields in Kashmir. Saffron has been associated with Kashmir for centuries. Kashmiri saffron is mainly grown in places like Pulwama, Budgam and Kishtwar. In May this year, the Kashmiri Saffron was given the Geographical Indication Tag or GI tag. Through this, we want to make Kashmiri Saffron a Globally Popular Brand. Kashmiri saffron is globally famous as a spice that has many medicinal properties. It has a strong aroma, its color is deep dark and its threads are long and thick which enhances its medicinal value.
It represents the rich cultural heritage of Jammu and Kashmir. And if you’re talking about the quality, the saffron of Kashmir is unique and completely different from the saffron of other countries. Saffron from Kashmir has now got a distinct identity with the GI Tag recognition. You will be delighted to know that after obtaining the GI Tag certificate, Kashmiri Saffron was launched in a supermarket in Dubai. Now its exports will get a boost. This will further strengthen our efforts to build an Atmanirbhar Bharat. Farmers growing saffron will be especially benefited by this. Now take a look at the case of Abdul MajeedWani, a resident of Shar area of Tral in Pulwama. He is selling his GI Tagged Saffron with the help of national Saffron Mission at the Trading Center in Pampore through E-Trading. Many people like him are involved in this activity in Kashmir. Next time you decide to buy saffron, think of buying saffron from Kashmir! Only The warmth of Kashmiri people is such that it imparts a unique, distinct flavor to the saffron.
My dear countrymen,
Just two days ago was Geeta jayanti. Gita inspires us in every context of our life. But have you ever thought why is Geeta such a wonderful Granth? That is because it is the voice of Lord Krishna himself. But the uniqueness of the Gita also lies in that it begins with the quest of knowledge… starts with a question. Arjuna asked the Lord a question, inquired and only then, the world received the wisdom of Gita. Like the Gita, all the wisdom in our culture starts with inquisitiveness. The very first mantra of Vedanta is – ‘Athaato Brahm Jigyasa’, that is, come, let us inquire about Brahm. That is why we talk about the inquest of even Brahm, the ultimate creator! Such is the power of inquisitiveness. Curiosity constantly inspires you to learn something new. In childhood, we learn only because we are curious. That is, we are alive as long as there is curiosity in us. As long as there is curiosity, the process of learning something new continues. No age, no circumstance, matters at all in this. I came to know of an example of such energy of inquisitiveness, about Shri T. Srinivasacharya Swami ji, an elderly person from Tamil Nadu! Shri T Srinivasacharya Swami Ji is Ninety-Two years old. Even at this age, he is writing his book on the computer; that too, typing himself. You must be thinking that writing a book is fine…. but in the times of Srinivasacharyaji, there were no computers. So, when did he learn the computer? It is right that there was no computer during his college days. But, there still is as much curiosity in his mind and self-confidence as it was in his youth. In fact, Srinivasacharya Swamiji is a scholar of Sanskrit and Tamil. He has written about 16 spiritual books so far. However, with the advent of the computer, when he realized that the method of writing and printing books had changed, he learned the computer and necessary software at the age of 86… yes, at the age of eighty-six. Now he is completing his book.
Friends,
Shri T Srinivasacharya Swamiji’s life is a living example of the fact that life remains full of energy, as long as the curiosity in life, the desire to learn, does not die. Hence, we should never think that we lagged behind; we missed. “Only if…we too had learnt this!” We should not even think that we cannot learn, or cannot move forward.
My dear countrymen,
We were just talking about learning and doing something new out of inquisitiveness. We were also referring to new resolutions in the New Year. But there are also some people who continuously keep on doing something new, keep on fulfilling new resolves. You too must have felt in life that when we do something for society, the society itself gives us energy to do a lot of things. Significant deeds can be accomplished with seemingly simple motivations. One such youth is Shriman Pradeedp Sangwan! Gurugram’s Pradeep Sangwan has been running a campaign ‘Healing Himalayas’ since 2016. He goes to different areas in the Himalayas with his team and volunteers where they clean plastic waste dumped there by tourists. So far, Pradeep ji has cleaned tons of plastic from various tourist locations in the Himalayas. Similarly, there is a young couple from Karnataka, Anudeep and Minusha. Anudeep and Minusha got married just last month in November.  A lot of young people go for a trip after marriage, but these two did something different. Both of them always saw that people go out on a trip, but, wherever they go, they leave a lot of garbage and waste behind. A similar situation was prevailing at the Someshwar beach in Karnataka. Anudeep and Minusha decided that they would clean up the garbage that people have left behind at the Someshwar beach. This was the first resolve that both husband and wife took after marriage. Together they cleaned up a lot of garbage from the beach. Anudeep also shared about his resolve on social media.  Inspired by his magnanimous thought, a number of young people came and joined him. You will be surprised to know that together these people have cleaned more than 800 kg of waste from Someshwar beach.
Friends,
Amidst these efforts, we also have to think that this garbage gets on these beaches, these mountains in the first place? After all, it is one among us only, who leaves this garbage there. We should run a cleanliness drive like Pradeep and Anudeep-Minusha. But even before that we should also take a resolve that we will not leave garbage at all, to begin with. After all, this is also the first resolution of the Clean India campaign.  And yes, I want to remind you of something more. Due to Corona, this year it could not be discussed much. We have to make our country free from single use plastic. This is also one of the resolutions of 2021. In conclusion, I extend my best wishes to you for the New Year. Stay healthy yourself, keep your family healthy too. Next year, in January, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ will touch upon new subjects.
Many thanks.


72. JANUARY 31, 2021
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. When I express Mann Ki Baat, it feels like I am present amongst you as a member of your family. Little matters exchanged that teach one another; bitter- sweet life experiences that become an inspiration for living a wholesome life…and this is just what Mann Ki Baat is! Today is the last day of January 2021. Are you too thinking, the way I am that 2021 had commenced just a few days ago? It just doesn’t feel that the entire month of January has passed by! This is what is termed as the speed of time. It feels like just a matter of a few days ago when we were exchanging good wishes with each other! Then we celebrated Lohri, Makar Sankranti, Pongal and Bihu. It was festival time in different parts of the country. We celebrated the 23rd of January, the birth anniversary of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose as PARAKRAM DIWAS and also watched the grand Republic Day Parade on the 26th of January. Following the Address to the joint session by Rashtrapati ji, the Budget Session has also begun. Amidst all of this, there was one more happening that is keenly awaited by all of us – that is the announcement of the Padma Awards. The nation honored people doing extraordinary work; for their achievements and contribution to humanity. This year too, the recipients comprise people who have done excellent work in myriad fields; through their endeavour, they’ve changed someone’s life, taking the country forward. Thus, the tradition of conferring the Padma honour on unsung heroes that was started a few years ago has been maintained this time too. I urge all of you to know more about these people and their contribution…discuss it amongst the family. You will see how this inspires everyone!
This month, there has been very good news from the cricket pitch too. Our cricket team, after initial setbacks made a grand comeback, winning the series in Australia. The hard work and teamwork of our players is inspirational. Amidst all this, the country was saddened by the insult to the Tricolor on the 26th of January in Delhi. We have to infuse times to come with new hope and novelty. Last year, we displayed exemplary patience and courage. This year too, we have to work hard to attain our resolves. We have to take our country forward at a faster pace.
My dear countrymen,
the beginning of this year marks the completion of almost one year of our battle against Corona. Just as India’s fight against Corona became an example, our vaccination Programme too is turning out to be exemplary to the world. Today, India is undertaking the world’s biggest Covid Vaccine Programme. Do you know what’s a matter of more pride? Along with the biggest Vaccine Programme, we are vaccinating our citizens faster than anywhere in the world. In just 15 days, India has vaccinated over 30 lakh Corona Warriors, whereas an advanced country such as America took 18 days to get the same done; Britain 36 days!
Friends,
today, the Made in India vaccine is, of course, a symbol of India’s self-reliance; it is also a symbol of her self-pride. On NamoApp, Bhai Himanshu Yadav from UP has written that the Made in India vaccine has generated a new self confidence within. Kirti ji writes from Madurai that many of her foreign friends are messaging her thanking India. Kirti ji’s friends have written to her that the way India has helped the world in the fight against Corona has enhanced the respect for India in their hearts. Kirti ji, listening to these notes of glory for the country also fills the listeners of Mann Ki Baat with a sense of pride. These days, I too receive similar messages for India from Presidents and Prime Ministers of different countries of the world. You must also have seen recently how the President of Brazil, in a tweet thanked India – every Indian was gladdened at that. People residing thousands of kilometers away in remote corners of the world are deeply aware of that context in Ramayan; they are intensely influenced by it. This is a speciality of our culture.
Friends,
in this vaccination Programme, you must have noticed something more! During the moment of crisis, India is able to serve the world today, since she is capable, self-reliant in the field of medicines, vaccines. The same thought underpins the Atmanirbhar Bharat Campaign. The more India is capable, the more will she serve humanity; correspondingly the world will benefit more!
My dear countrymen,
every time, lots of your letters are received; one gets to know about your thoughts through your messages on Namo App and MyGov and phone calls. One amongst these messages caught my attention – this is from sister Priyanka Pandey ji. 23 year old Beti Priyanka ji is a student of Hindi literature and resides at Siwan in Bihar. Priyanka ji has written on Namo App that she was highly inspired by my suggestion of visiting 15 domestic tourist places in the country and hence on the 1st of January, she started for a destination which was very special. The place was 15 kilometers away from her home – it was the ancestral residence of the country’s first President Dr Rajendra Prasad ji. Priyanka ji has beautifully mentioned that this was her first step in the realm of acquainting herself with the country’s great luminaries. There, Priyanka ji came across many books written by Dr Rajendra Prasad and many historical photographs as well. Really Priyanka ji, this experience of yours will inspire others too.
Friends,
this year, India is going to commence the celebration of 75 years of her Independence – Amrit Mahotsav. In this context, this is an excellent time to explore places associated with those heroes on account of whom we attained Freedom.
Friends,
as we refer to the Freedom Movement and Bihar, I would like to touch upon another comment made on Namo App. Jai Ram Viplava, a resident of Munger has written to me about the Tarapur Martyr day. On 15th of February 1932, the Britishers had mercilessly killed several of a group of brave young patriots. Their only crime was that they were raising the slogan of ‘Vande Matram’ and ‘Bharat Mata Ki Jai’.I bow to those martyrs and remember their courage with reverence. I want to thank Jai Ram Viplava ji. He has brought to the notice of the country an incident about which not as much discussion happened as should have been done.
My dear countrymen,
the freedom struggle was fought with full might in every part, every city, every town and village of India. In every corner of this land, Bharatbhoomi, great sons and brave daughters were born who gave up their lives for the nation. Hence it is very important that we preserve the saga of their struggles for our sake and their memories and for this we can write about them to keep their memories alive for generations to come. I appeal to all countrymen, especially the young friends to write about freedom fighters, incidents associated with freedom. Write books about the saga of valour during the period of freedom struggle in your area. Now, as India will celebrate 75 years of her freedom, your writings will be the best tribute to those heroes of our freedom. An initiative has been taken for Young Writers for the purpose of India Seventy-Five. This will encourage young writers of all states and of all languages. Writers who write on such subjects, who have studied deeply Indian heritage and culture, will come forth in large numbers in the country. We have to fully help such emerging talents. This will also prepare a category of thought leaders that will decide the course of the future. I invite my young friends to be a part of this initiative and to use their literary skills more and more. Information about this can be accessed from the website of the Ministry of Education.
My dear countrymen,
what the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ like, only you know better. But for me the best thing that I like in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is that I get to learn and read a lot. In a way, indirectly, I get an opportunity to connect with you all. Someone’s effort, somebody’s zeal, someone’s passion to achieve something for the country – all this inspires me a lot, fills me with energy.
I felt very happy on reading about how a local vegetable market in Boinpalli of Hyderabad is fulfilling its responsibility. All of us have seen that in vegetable markets, a lot of produce gets spoilt for a variety of reasons. The vegetables spread all around, it spreads filth too, but the vegetable market of Boinpalli decided that it will not throw away the leftover vegetables just like that. People associated with the vegetable market decided that they will generate electricity from this. You may have hardly heard of generating electricity from waste vegetables – this is the power of innovation. Today in Boinpalli vegetable market what was once a waste, wealth is getting created from that – this is the journey of creation of wealth from waste. Nearly 10-tonnes of waste is generated there every day, which is collected in a plant. In this plant 500-units of electricity is generated every day, and about 30 Kilos of bio fuel too is generated. The vegetable market is illuminated through this electricity and the bio fuel that is generated is used to cook food in the market canteen – isn’t it a wonderful effort!
A similar amazing feat has been achieved by the Badaut village Panchayat of Panchkula in Haryana. This Panchayat faced the problem of water drainage. Because of this dirty water was spilling around, spreading disease, but, people of Badaut decided that they would create wealth even from this water waste. The village Panchayat started filtering the dirty water coming from the village after collecting it at a place, and this filtered water is now being used for irrigation by the farmers of the village, thereby, liberating them from pollution, filth and disease and irrigating the fields too.
Friends,
an example of how protection of environment can open avenues of income was seen in Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh too. For centuries a type of paper called ‘Mon Shugu’ is made in this hilly region of Arunachal Pradesh. The locals here make this paper from the bark of a plant named Shugu Sheng, hence trees do not have to be cut to make this paper. Besides, no chemical is used in making this paper, thus, this paper is safe for the environment and for health too. There was a time when this paper was exported but with modern techniques, large amount of paper started getting made and this local art was pushed to the brink of closure. Now a local social worker Gombu has made an effort to rejuvenate this art, this is also giving employment to tribal brothers and sisters there.
I have seen another news from Kerala that makes us realise our responsibilities. In Kottayam of Kerala there is an elderly divyang, N.S Rajappan Sahab. Due to paralysis, Rajappan is incapable of walking, but this has not affected his commitment to cleanliness. For the past several years he has been going by boat in Vembanad lake and taking out the plastic bottles thrown into the lake. Think, how great Rajappan ji’s thought is! Taking inspiration from Rajappan ji, we too should, wherever possible, make our contribution to cleanliness.
My dear countrymen,
you must have witnessed a few days ago, that four women pilots from India took command of a non-stop flight from San Francisco, America to Bangalore. Travelling more than ten thousand kilometres, this flight ferried more than two hundred and fifty passengers to India. You must have also observed this time in the 26th January parade, where two women officers of the Indian Air Force created new history. Whatever be the area, the participation of the women of the country is continuously on the rise, but, often we see that, there is not much discussion of similar changes occurring in the villages of the country, so, when I got this news from Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh, I felt that I must make a mention of it in ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
This news is very inspiring. In Chichgaon, Jabalpur, some tribal women were working on daily wages in a rice mill. Just like the Corona pandemic affected every person in the world, these women were also affected. Work stopped in their rice mill. Naturally, their income got affected as well but they did not get disheartened; they did not give up. They decided that collectively they would start their own rice mill. The mill where they worked wanted to sell its machine too. One among these women, Meena Rahangadale ji formed a ‘Self Help Group’ by associating all the women, and all of them raised capital from their savings. Whatever amount of money was short, was sourced under the aegis of Ajivika mission in the form of a loan from the bank, and, now see, these tribal sisters bought the same rice mill in which they once worked! Today they are running their own rice mill. Within this very period, this mill has also earned a profit of about three lakh rupees. With this profit, Meena ji, and her colleagues, are arranging to repay the bank loan and then seeking avenues to expand their business. Such amazing efforts have taken place in every corner of the country to counter whatever circumstances Corona created.
My dear countrymen,
if I mention Bundelkhand to you, what are the things that will come to your mind? Those interested in history will connect this area with Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi. At the same time, some people will think of beautiful and serene Orchha. And some people will also remember the extreme heat conditions of this region, but, these days something different is happening here which is quite heartening, and about which, we must know. Recently, a month long ‘Strawberry Festival’ began in Jhansi.Everyone is surprised – Strawberry and Bundelkhand! But, this is the truth. Now, there is growing enthusiasm about the cultivation of Strawberry in Bundelkhand, and one of Jhansi’s daughters – Gurleen Chawla has played a huge role in it! A Law student Gurleen carried out Strawberry cultivation successfully first at her home and then in her farm raising the hope that this was possible in Jhansi too. Jhansi’s Strawberry festival emphasizes the ‘Stay at Home’ concept. Through this festival, farmers and youth are being encouraged to do gardening and grow strawberries in the vacant spaces behind their home, or in the Terrace Garden. With the help of new technology, similar efforts are also being done in other parts of the country, Strawberry which was once identified with the hills, is now also being cultivated in the sandy soil of Kutch, boosting the income of farmers.
Friends,
experiments like the Strawberry Festival not only demonstrate the spirit of Innovation ; they also demonstrate the manner in which the agricultural sector of our country is adopting new technologies. Friends, the government is committed to modernizing agriculture and is also taking many steps in that direction. The efforts of the Government shall also continue in future.
My dear countrymen,
just a few days ago I watched a video. That video was of Sarmuddin, a painter from Naya Pingla village in West Midnapore, West Bengal. He was expressing happiness that his painting based on Ramayana had sold for two lakh rupees. This brought great happiness to his fellow villagers too. After watching this video, I was curious to know more about it. In this very context, I came to know about a very good initiative related to West Bengal, which, I would definitely like to share with you.
The regional office of the Ministry of Tourism started an ‘Incredible India Weekend Getaway’ in the villages of Bengal at the beginning of the month. The Handicraft artisans from West Midnapore, Bankura, Birbhum, Purulia, East Bardhaman, organized handicraft workshop for visitors. I was also told that the total sales of handicrafts during the Incredible India Weekend Getaways is very encouraging to the handicraft artisans. People are also making our art forms popular employing novel methods across the country.
Look at Bhagyashree Sahu of Rourkela, Odisha. Although she is a student of Engineering, in the past few months, she started learning the art of Pattchitra and has mastered it. But, did you know where she began painting – Soft Stones, on Soft Stones. On her way to college, Bhagyashree found these Soft Stones, she collected and cleaned them. Later, she painted these stones in Pattachitra style for two hours every day. After painting these stones, she started gifting them to her friends. During the lockdown, she started painting on bottles too. And now, she even conducts workshops on this art form. A few days ago, on the birth anniversary of Subhash Babu, Bhagyashree paid him a unique tribute done on stone. I wish her all the best for her future endeavours. A lot new can be learnt and done through Art and Colours.
I was informed of a similar novel initiative being carried out in Dumka, Jharkhand. A principal of a middle school there, in order to teach and help the children learn, got the village walls painted with the letters of the English and Hindi alphabets ; alongside various pictures have also been painted which are helping the village children a lot. I extend my greetings to all such individuals who are involved in such initiatives.
My dear countrymen,
thousands of kilometers from India, across many oceans and continents, lies a country – Chile. It takes a lot of time to reach Chile from India. However, the fragrance of Indian culture has been there for a long time. Another significant aspect is that Yoga is extremely popular there. You will be pleased to know that there are more than 30 Yoga schools in Santiago, the capital of Chile. The International Day of Yoga is also celebrated with great fervor in Chile. I have been told that the House of Deputies is full of ardent enthusiasm for the Yoga Day. In these times of Corona, with a stress on immunity and ways to strengthen it, through the power of Yoga, now they are attaching much more importance to Yoga. The Chilean Congress, that is their Parliament, has passed a proposal. There, the 4th of November has been declared as National Yoga Day. Now, you would be wondering, what is so special about 4th of November! On 4th of November 1962, the first Yoga institution in Chile was established by José Rafael Estrada. By proclaiming this day as National Yoga Day, a tribute has been paid to Estrada ji. This is a special honour by the Chilean Parliament, which every Indian takes pride in. By the way, there is another aspect about the Chilean Parliament, one which will interest you. The name of the Vice President of the Chilean Senate is Rabindranath Quinteros. He has been so named, inspired by Vishwa Kavi Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore.
My dear countrymen,
I have been requested by Dr. Swapnil Mantri from Jalna,Maharashtra and Prahlad Rajgopalan from Palakkad, Kerala on MyGov to speak on ‘Road safety’ in Mann Ki Baat. This very month, from the 18th of January to the 17th of February, our country is observing Road Safety month. Road accidents are a matter of concern not just in our country but also the world over. Today, in India, many efforts are being made for road safety at the individual and collective level along with the Government. We should all become active stakeholders in these efforts to save lives.
Friends,
you must have noticed, passing through the roads that the Border Road Organization builds, one gets to see many innovative slogans. Slogans such as ‘This is highway not runway’ or ‘Be Mr. Late than Late Mr.’ are quite effective in promoting awareness about being careful on the roads. Now you can also send such innovative slogans or catch phrases on MyGov. Good slogans from you too will be used in this campaign.
Friends,
whilst speaking about Road safety, I would like to mention a post received on NaMo app from Aparna Das ji of Kolkata. Aparna ji has asked me to speak on the ‘FASTag programme’. She says that the experience of travel has changed with ‘FASTag’. This saves not just travel time ; problems like stopping at Toll Plaza, worrying about cash payment are also over. Aparna ji is right too! Earlier, a vehicle used to take on an average 7 to 8 minutes to cross our toll plazas. However, since the emergence of ‘FASTag’, this time has reduced to around one and a half minutes to 2 minutes on an average. Due to this reduced waiting time at the Toll plaza, fuel too is being saved. It is estimated that this will save approximately 21 thousand crore Rupees of our countrymen. That is saving money as well as time. I urge all of you to follow all the guidelines, take care of yourself and also save the lives of others.
Friends,
it is said here- “जलबिंदु निपातेन क्रमशः पूर्यते घटः”, meaning that drop by drop, the pot gets filled. Every single effort of ours leads to the realization of our resolve. Therefore, the goals with which we started in 2021, we all have to fulfill them together. Come, let us all work together to make this year meaningful. Do keep sending your messages, your ideas. We will meet again next month.
Iti Vidaa punarmilanaay.
इति-विदा पुनर्मिलनाय !


73. FEBRUARY 28, 2021
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. Yesterday was the festival of Magh Poornima. The month of Magh is regarded related especially to rivers, lakes and water sources. It has been mentioned in our scriptures: MAGHE NIMAGNAAHA SALILE SUSHITE, VIMUKTAPAAPAAHA TRIDIVAM PRAYAANTI – meaning, in the month of Magh, a bath in any holy water body is considered sacred. In every society of the world, invariably, there is one tradition or the other with respect to a river. Many civilizations have evolved along the banks of rivers. Since our culture is thousands of years old, the spread of this phenomenon is more evident here. There must not be a single day in India, when there is no festival connected with water in some corner of the country or the other. During the period of Magh, people even leave their homes, near and dear ones, comforts and amenities to perform KALPVAAS on the banks of rivers. This time, in Haridwar, KUMBH too is being held. For us, water is life; faith too and the flow of development as well. In a way, water is more important than PARAS, the philosopher’s stone. It is said that with the touch of a PARAS, iron gets turned into gold. Similarly, the touch of water is necessary for life; imperative for development.
Friends,
possibly there is another reason to associate the month of Magh with water – after this, winters come to an end and summers start knocking. Hence, for the conservation of water, we should begin efforts right away. A few days later, just on the 22nd of the month of March, it’s World Water Day.
Aaradhya from U.P. has written to me that millions of people in the world spend a major part of their lives in overcoming water shortage. It has not been said without reason, ‘BIN PAANI SAB SOON’ – without water, everything comes to a naught! In order to solve the water crisis, Sujit ji of North Dinajpur has sent me a very nice message. Sujit ji has written that Nature has bestowed upon us a collective gift in the form of Water; hence the responsibility of saving it is also collective. It is correct that just as there is a collective gift, there is a collective accountability too. Sujit ji’s thought is absolutely correct. River, lake, pond or ground water – all of these are for everyone.
Friends,
there was a time when in villages, people would collectively look after wells and ponds. Now one such effort is underway at Thiruvannamalai, Tamilnadu. Here, local people have been running a campaign for the conservation of their wells. These people are rejuvenating public wells in their vicinity that had been lying unused for years.
The endeavour of Babita Rajput ji of village Agrotha in Madhya Pradesh will inspire all of you. Babita ji’s village is in Bundelkhand. Close to her village, once there was a very large lake which had dried up. She mobilized other women of the village itself and built a canal to bring water to the lake. Through this canal, rainwater started flowing directly into the lake. Now this lake remains filled with water.
Friends,
the work of Jagdish Kuniyal ji, resident of Bageshwar, Uttarakhand also teaches us a lot. Jagdish ji’s village and the adjoining area were dependent on a natural source for their water requirements. But many years ago, the source dried up. This led to worsening of the water crisis in the entire area. Jagdish ji decided to solve the crisis through tree plantation. Along with fellow villagers, he planted thousands of trees over the entire area…and today, the dried up water source at the place is filled to the brim once again.
Friends,
similarly, we shall have to understand our collective responsibilities with regard to water. In most parts of India, rainfall begins in May-June. Can we right away start a 100 day campaign for the sake of cleaning up water sources around us and conserving rainwater? With this very thought in mind, in a few days from now, Jal Shakti Abhiyan CATCH THE RAIN is being initiated by the Jal Shakti Ministry. Its credo is ‘CATCH THE RAIN, WHERE IT FALLS, WHEN IT FALLS’. We shall commit ourselves to the task right now…we shall get existing rain water harvesting systems repaired, clean up lakes and ponds in villages, remove impediments in the way of water flowing into water sources; thus we shall be able to conserve rainwater to the maximum.
My dear countrymen,
whenever a discussion on the month of Magh and its spiritual-social significance takes place, the discourse is never complete without one name – the name is that of Sant Ravidas ji. Sant Ravidas ji’s birth anniversary falls on the very day of Magh Poornima. Even today, the words, the knowledge of Sant Ravidas ji guide us on our path. He’d said:
EKAI MAATI KE SABH BHAANDE, SABH KA EKAU SIRJANHAAR | RAVIDAS VYAAPAI EKAI GHAT BHEETAR, SABH KAU EKAY GHADAI KUMHAR ||
All of us are earthen vessels of one clay; all of us have been coiled and shaped by the One. Sant Ravidas ji always expressed himself openly on the social ills that had pervaded society. He laid bare social evils in front of society, showed the path of redemption; and that’s why Meera ji had said, ‘GURU MILIYA RAIDAS, DEENHI GYAAN KI GUTKI’ |
It’s my good fortune that I am connected with Varanasi, the birth place of Sant Ravidas ji. I have experienced the spiritual loftiness of Sant Ravidas ji’s life and his energy at the pilgrimage site. Friends, Ravidas ji used to say
‘KARAM BANDHAN MEIN BANDH RAHIYO, PHAL KI NA TAJJIYO AAS | KARMA MAANUSH KA DHARMA HAI, SAT BHAAKHAI RAVIDAS ||
Meaning, we should incessantly strive with our Karma, our work; the Phal, the reward is bound to come your way. This means – Karma leads to Siddhi, attainment with certitude. Our youth must learn one more thing from Sant Ravidas ji. For doing any work, they should not bind themselves to old methods and practices. Decide and shape your life yourself. Devise your own methods and practices, set your goals yourselves. If your conscience and self confidence is unshakeable, you need not fear anything in the world.
I say so since often due to pressures of traditional thinking our youth are not able to do what they really like. That is why you should never hesitate in thinking new, doing new. In the same manner Sant Ravidas ji has given another important message. This message is ‘to stand on one’s own feet’. It is not fair at all that we remain dependant on others for our dreams. Things remaining to continue the way they are… Ravidas ji was never in favour of this. Today, we see that the youth of the country too is not at all in favour of this thinking. Today when I see the innovative spirit of the youth of the country, I feel Ravidas ji too would have definitely felt proud of our youth.
My dear countrymen,
today happens to be the ‘National Science Day’ too. The day is dedicated to the discovery of ‘Raman Effect’ by the great scientist of India, Dr C. V. Raman. Yogeshwaran ji from Kerala has written on NamoApp that the discovery of Raman Effect had changed the direction of science in its entirety. Snehil ji from Nasik too has sent me a very good message connected with this. Snehil ji has written that there are many scientists from our country without whose contribution science would not have progressed as much. The way we know of other scientists of the world, in the same way we should also know about the scientists of India. I too agree with this view of these listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I definitely would want that our youth know, understand and read a lot about the history of science of India ; about our scientists as well.
Friends,
when we talk of science then many a time people restrict it to physics-chemistry or labs, but the spread of science is much more than that. And there is a lot of contribution of the power of science in the ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat Campaign’. We have to move science forward with the mantra of ‘Lab to Land’.
Chintala Venkat Reddy ji from Hyderabad is an example. A doctor friend of Reddy ji once told him about the diseases caused by deficiency of vitamin D and the dangers thereof. Reddy ji is a farmer, he thought about what he could do about solving this problem. After this he worked a lot and developed breeds of wheat and rice that specially contained vitamin D. This month itself he has received patent from World Intellectual Property Organization, Geneva. Our Government is fortunate that Venkat Reddy was also honoured with the Padmashree last year.
Similarly, Urugen Futsog of Ladakh too is working very innovatively. At those heights Urugen is growing about 20 crops organically, that too in a cyclic way, that is, he utilises the waste of one crop as manure for the other crop. Isnt’ it amazing?
In the same way Kamraj Bhai Choudhary from Patan district in Gujarat has developed good seeds of drum stick at home itself. Some people call drum stick as Sargava or Moringa. Drum sticks that are grown with the help of good seeds are of good quality too. Now by sending his produce to Tamil Nadu and West Bengal he is raising his income also.
Friends,
nowadays you must be hearing a lot, the name of Chia seeds. People connected to health awareness give a lot of importance to it and it has a lot of demand too in the world. In India, it is mostly sourced from abroad but now people are taking up the challenge to be self-reliant in Chia seeds too. Similarly, Harishchandra ji of Barabanki in UP has begun farming of Chia seeds. Cultivation of Chia seeds will also increase his income and will help in the self-reliant India campaign too.
Friends,
many experiments of creating wealth from agricultural waste too are being run successfully in the entire country. Like, Murugesan ji from Madurai made a machine to make ropes from waste of banana. This innovation of Murugesan ji will solve the issues of environment and filth too, and will also pave the way for additional income for the farmers.
Friends,
the purpose of talking about so many people to the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is that we all should get motivated by them. When every citizen of the country will spread the spirit of science in his life and in every field, avenues of progress will also open up and the country will become self-reliant too. And I do believe that every citizen of the country can do this.
My dear friends,
Ranjan ji from Kolkata, in his letter, has raised a very interesting and fundamental question and along with that, has tried to answer it in the best way. He asks what it means to us when we talk of becoming self-reliant. In answer to this very question, he himself further writes that- “’Self reliant India” is not just a Government policy, but is a national spirit. He believes that being self-reliant means deciding one’s own fate, that is controlling one’s own destiny. Ranjan babu is a hundred percent correct. Furthering what he has said, I too would say that the first condition for self-reliance is to have pride in the things of one’s own country; to take pride in the things made by people of one’s own country. When every countryman takes pride, every countryman connects; self-reliant India doesn’t remain just an economic campaign but becomes a national spirit. When we see fighter plane Tejas made in our own country doing acrobatics in the sky, when Made in India tanks, Made in India missiles increase our pride, when we see Made in India coaches in Metro trains in wealthy-advanced nations, when we see Made in India Corona Vaccines reaching dozens of countries, then our heads rise higher. And it is not that only bigger things will make India self-reliant. Textiles made in India, handicraft goods made by talented artisans of India, electronic appliances of India, mobiles of India, in every field we have to raise this pride. When we move forward with this thought, only then will we become self-reliant in the truest sense… and friends, I am happy that this mantra of self-reliant India is reaching the villages of the country. This very thing happened in Bettiah, about which I got to read in the media.
A resident of Bettiah, Pramod ji worked as a technician in an LED bulb manufacturing factory in Delhi. During his work in the factory, he understood the intricacies of the entire process in great detail. But during corona Pramod ji had to return to his home. Do you know what Pramod ji did after returning? He himself started a small unit to manufacture LED bulbs. He brought along some youngsters from his area and completed the journey from being a factory worker to becoming a factory owner in a few months ; that too while living in his own house.
There is one more example from Garhmukteshwar in UP. Shriman Santosh Ji from Garhmukteshwar, has written how during the Corona outbreak he turned adversity into opportunity. Santosh ji’s ancestors were craftsmen par excellence ; they used to make mats. When everything came to a halt at the time of Corona, these people began mat making with great energy and enthusiasm. Soon, they started getting orders for their mats not only from Uttar Pradesh, but also from other states. Santosh ji also narrated that with this the hundreds of years old beautiful art of this region has received a new strength.
Friends,
there are many examples across the country where people are contributing in a similar manner to the ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan’. Today it has become a sentiment, flowing in the hearts of common folk.
My dear countrymen,
I saw an interesting post by Mayur, a resident of Gurgaon, on the NaMo App. He is a passionate bird watcher and a nature lover. Mayur ji has written that while he lives in Haryana, he wishes us to touch upon the people of Assam, and in particular, the people of Kaziranga. I thought that Mayur ji would talk about the Rhino, hailed as the pride of Kaziranga. But Mayur ji instead has asked for appreciation of the people of Assam for the rise in the number of Waterfowls in Kaziranga. I was searching for a common term to describe Waterfowls in simple terminology, and found the word – Jalpakshi – Birds that nest not on the trees but on the water, such as ducks and others.
The Kaziranga National Park & ​​Tiger Reserve Authority has been carrying out its Annual Waterfowls Census for some time. This Census reveals the population of water birds and also about their favorite Habitat. Just two-three weeks ago, the survey was conducted again. You will also be delighted to know that this time the number of water birds has increased by about one hundred seventy five (175%) percent compared to last year. A total of 112 Species of Birds have been sighted in Kaziranga National Park during this Census. And of these, 58 species happen to be winter migrants from different parts of the world including Europe, Central Asia and East Asia. The most important reason for this is that here, there is better water conservation along with very little human interference. However, in some cases, positive human interference is also very important.
Just take the example of Shri Jadav Payeng of Assam with whom some of you certainly must be familiar. He has received the Padma award for his work. Shri Jadav Payeng is the person who actively contributed in raising about 300 hectares of plantations in the Majuli Island in Assam. He has been constantly working for forest conservation and is also involved in motivating people for Plantation and conservation of biodiversity.
Friends,
our temples in Assam are also playing a unique role in the protection of nature. If you take a look at our temples, you will find that every temple has a pond in the vicinity. The Hayagriva Madheb Temple at Hajo, the Nagashankar Temple at Sonitpur and the Ugratara Temple at Guwahati have many such ponds nearby. They are being used to save near extinct species of turtles. Assam is home to the highest number of species of turtles. The ponds of theses temples can become excellent sites for their conservation and breeding and training about them.
My dear countrymen,
some people think that it is necessary to be a scientist to do innovation and some believe that it is essential to be a teacher to teach something to others. Those who challenge this line of thinking are worthy of praise. Now for example if anyone trains someone to become a soldier, is it necessary for him to be a soldier? You may be thinking that yes, it is necessary. But here is a little twist!
On MyGov app, Kamalakant ji has shared a media report which states something different. There is a gentleman in Arakhuda in Odisha – Nayak Sir. Although his name is Silu Nayak, everyone addresses him as Nayak Sir. In reality he is a man on a mission! He imparts free training to the youth who want to join the army. The name of the organization of Nayak Sir is Mahaguru Battalion. The training touches upon all the aspects from physical fitness to interviews and writing to training. You will be surprised to know that the people this organization has trained, have secured their places in uniformed forces such as the Army, Navy, Air Force, CRPF and BSF.
By the way, you will also be amazed to know that Silu Nayak ji had himself tried to get recruited in Odisha Police but could not succeed. Despite this, on the basis of his own training, he has made many youth worthy of national service. Come, let us all wish Nayak Sir greater success for preparing more heroes for our country.
Friends, sometimes even a very small and simple question rankles the mind. These questions are not very long ; they are very simple, yet they make us think. A few days ago Aparna Reddy ji of Hyderabad asked me one such question. She said “You have been PM for so many years and were CM for so many years. Do you ever feel that something is missing?” Aparna ji’s question seems simple but is equally difficult. I pondered this over and told myself that one of my shortcomings was that I could not make much effort to learn Tamil, the oldest language in the world ; I could not make myself learn Tamil! It is such a beautiful language, which is popular all over the world. Many people have told me a lot about the quality of Tamil literature and the depth of the poems written in it. India is a land of many languages, which symbolizes our culture and pride. Speaking of language, I want to share a small, interesting clip with you.
(SOUND CLIP STATUE OF UNITY)
Actually, what you were listening to now is a guide at the Statue of Unity, informing people in Sanskrit about the tallest statue of Sardar Patel in the world. You will be happy to know that there are more than 15 guides in Kevadiya, who guide people in fluent Sanskrit. Now I present to you one more voice –
(SOUND CLIP CRICKET COMMENTARY)
You too would have been surprised to hear this. Actually, this is a cricket commentary being done in Sanskrit. In Varanasi, a cricket tournament is held among Sanskrit colleges. These colleges are – Shastharth College, Swami Vedanti Ved Vidyapeeth, Sri Brahma Veda Vidyalaya and International Chandramouli Charitable Trust. Commentary is also done in Sanskrit during the matches of this tournament. I just played for you a very small part of that commentary. Not only this, in this tournament, players and commentators are seen in the traditional attire. If you want energy, excitement, suspense all at once, then you should listen to the sports commentaries. Long before the advent of TV, sports commentary was the medium through which people of the country felt the thrill of sports like cricket and hockey. The commentary for tennis and football matches is also very well presented. We have seen that games in which commentaries are vibrant, they get promoted and gain popularity very fast. Here too, we have many Indian sports, where commentary culture has not permeated yet and due to this they are in a state of near extinction. I have a thought – Why not have good commentaries of different sports and especially Indian sports in more and more languages, we must think about encouraging it. I would urge the Sports Ministry and private institutional partners to think about it.
My dear young friends,
the coming few months are of special importance in the lives of all of you. Most of the young friends will have exams. Do all of you remember – You have to become a warrior not a worrier, go gleefully for the examination and come back with a smile. You have to compete with yourself, not with anyone else. Get adequate sleep and be mindful of time management. Do not stop playing, for those who play are the ones that blossom. Revision and smart methods of memorization are to be adopted, that is, overall, in these exams, you have to bring out your best. You must be thinking how all this will be possible. We’re going to do it together. Like every year, this year too we will have ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’. But before the ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’ to be held in March, I request all of you exam warriors, parents and teachers to share your experiences, your tips. You can share on MyGov platform and Narendra Modi app. This time, along with the youth, parents and teachers are also invited to ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’. You will get all the information on MyGov – how to participate, how to win the prize, how to get an opportunity to discuss with me. So far, more than one lakh students, about 40 thousand parents, and about 10 thousand teachers have participated. You too participate today itself. In the times of Corona, I took out some time, added many new mantras in the exam warrior book; some for the parents as well. A lot of interesting activities related to these mantras are given on the Narendra Modi App which will help to ignite the exam warrior in you. Do try them. Best wishes to all my young friends for the upcoming exams.
My dear countrymen, the month of March is also the last month of our financial year, therefore, it will be a very busy period for many of you. The way economic activities are intensifying in the country, the activities of our business and entrepreneur friends are also increasing. In the midst of all these, we should not lower our guard against Corona. May all of you be healthy, be happy, stay steadfast on the path of duty and service and the country will continue to move ahead fast. Best wishes in advance to all of you for the festivals; there should not be any laxity in the rules regarding Corona as well.
Many many thanks.


74. MARCH 28, 2021
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. This time when I was perusing the letters, comments; the varied inputs that keep pouring in for Mann ki Baat, many people recalled a very important point. On MyGov, Aryan Shri – Anup Rao from Bengaluru, Devesh from Noida, Sujeet from Thane – all of them said – Modi ji, this time, it’s the 75th episode of Mann ki Baat; congratulations for that. I express my gratitude to you for following Mann ki Baat so minutely; for staying connected as well. For me, it’s a matter of deep pride; it’s a matter of joy. From my side, it’s of course THANKS to you; I also express thanks to all the listeners of Mann ki Baat, since this journey just wouldn’t have been possible without your support. It seems like just yesterday when we had embarked upon this journey of thoughts and ideas. Then, on the 3rd of October, 2014, it was the pious occasion of Vijayadashmi; look at the coincidence – today it is Holika Dahan. ‘May one lamp light another, thus illuminating the Nation’ – treading along this sentiment, we’ve traversed this way.  We spoke to people across each and every corner of the country and learnt about their extraordinary work. You too must have experienced that even in the remotest corners of our country, there lies vast, unparalleled potential – myriad gems are being nurtured, ensconced in the lap of Mother India. Well for me, it has been a phenomenal experience in itself to watch society, know about society, realizing her strength. During these 75 episodes, one went through a multitude of subjects. At times, there was reference to rivers; at other times the peaks of the Himalayas were touched upon…sometimes matters pertaining to deserts; at other times taking up natural disasters…sometimes soaking in innumerable stories on service to humanity…in some, inventions in technology; in others, the story of an experience of doing something novel in an unknown corner! You see, whether it’s about sanitation or a discussion on conserving our heritage; and not just that, reference to making toys, what is it that was not there? Perhaps, the sheer number of topics that we touched upon would turn out to be countless! During all this, from time to time, we paid tributes to great luminaries whose contribution in the building of India has been unparalleled; we learnt about them. We also spoke on many global matters; we’ve tried to derive inspiration from them. There were many points that you told me; you gave me many ideas. In a way, in this ‘Vichar Yatra’, journey of thought and idea, you kept walking together, kept connecting, adding something new throughout. During this 75th episode, at the outset, I express my heartfelt thanks to each and every listener of Mann ki Baat for making it a success, enriching it and staying connected.
My dear countrymen, you see how big a pleasant coincidence it is that today I got an opportunity to express my 75th Mann ki Baat! This very month is the one that marks the commencement of ‘Amrit Mahotsav’ of the 75 years of Independence. ‘Amrit Mahotsav’ had begun from the day of Dandi Yatra and will continue till the 15th of August, 2023. Programmes in connection with Amrit Mahotsav are being held throughout the country consistently; people are sharing information and pictures of these programmes from a multitude of places. Naveen from Jharkhand has sent me a message on NamoApp, along with some such pictures. He has written that he watched programmes on Amrit Mahotsav and decided that he would visit at least ten places connected with the Freedom Struggle. The first name on his list is that of the birthplace of Bhagwan Birsa Munda. Naveen has written that he will disseminate stories of the tribal freedom fighters of Jharkhand to other parts of the country. Bhai Naveen, I congratulate you on your thought.
Friends, be it the struggle saga of a freedom fighter; be it the history of a place or any cultural story from the country, you can bring it to the fore during Amrit Mahotsav; you can become a means to connect the countrymen with it. You will see – by and by, Amrit Mahotsav will be filled up with similar inspiring drops of nectar…and then the elixir that will flow will inspire us till a hundred years of the Independence of India…it will elevate the country to newer heights, begetting a fervor to do something or the other for the country. In the struggle for freedom, our fighters underwent innumerable hardships since they considered sacrifice for the sake of the country as their duty. May the immortal saga of their sacrifice, ‘Tyaag’ and ‘Balidan’ continuously inspire us towards the path of duty.  And  as Bhagwan Krishna has said in the Gita, “Niyatam Kuru Karma Twam Karma Jyaayo Hyakarmanah| Along the same sentiment, may all of us fulfill our assigned duties faithfully. And the Amrit Mahotsav of our freedom implies that we make new resolves….and to realize those resolves, we persevere wholeheartedly with due diligence…and resolves should be such that are meant for welfare of society, for the good of the country, for a bright future for India…resolves should be such in which the self assumes one responsibility or the other…intertwined with one’s own duty. I do believe we possess this golden opportunity to embody, live the Gita.
My dear countrymen, last year it was this very month of March when the country heard the term ‘Janata Curfew’for the first time. Just have a look at the experience of the might of the great Praja, people of this great country…Janata Curfew had become a bewilderment to the entire world. It was an unprecedented example of discipline; generations to come will certainly feel proud at that. Similarly, expressing honour, respect for our Corona Warriors, ringing Thaalis, applauding, lighting a lamp! You cannot imagine how much it had touched the hearts of Corona Warriors…and that is the very reason they resolutely held on the whole year, without tiring, without halting. Steadfastly, they endured to save the life of each and every citizen of the country. Last year, around this time, the question that was looming was…by when would the corona vaccine come! Friends, it’s a matter of honour for everyone that today, India is running the world’s largest vaccination programme. Pushpa Shukla ji from Bhubaneshwar has written to me about photographs of the vaccination programme. She urges that I should discuss in Mann ki Baat the enthusiasm visible in the elderly of the household regarding the vaccine. Friends, it is right, as well…we are getting to hear such news from all corners of the country; we are seeing such pictures that touch our hearts. 109 year old elderly mother from Jaunpur UP, Ram Dulaiya ji has taken the vaccination; similarly 107 year old Kewal Krishna ji in Delhi has taken the dose of the vaccine. 100 year old Jai Chaudhary from Hyderabad has taken the vaccine and it’s an appeal to all to take the vaccine. I am observing on Twitter -Facebook how after getting the vaccine for the elderly of their homes people are uploading their pictures. A youth Anandan Nair from Kerala in fact has given a new term to this- ‘Vaccine service’. Similar messages have been sent by Shivani from Delhi, Himanshu from Himachal and many other youths. I appreciate these thoughts of all you listeners. Amidst all these, do remember the mantra to fight corona- dawaayibhikadaayibhi. It is not that I have to just say; we have to live too, speak too, tell too and keep making people committed to ‘dawayibhikadayeebhi’ too.
My dear countrymen, today I have to thank Soumya ji who lives in Indore. She has drawn my attention to a subject and urged me to mention it in ‘Man kiBaat’. This subject is – the new record of Indian cricketer MitaaliRaaj. Recently MitaaliRaaj ji has become the first Indian woman cricketer to  have made ten thousand runs. Many congratulations to her on this achievement. She also is the only international woman player to score seven thousand runs in one day internationals. Her contribution in the field of women’s cricket is fabulous. Mitali Raj ji has inspired millions during her more than two decades long career. The story of her perseverance and success is an inspiration not just for women cricketers but for men cricketers too.
Friends, it is interesting… in the month of March itself, when we were celebrating women’s day, many women players secured records and medals in their name. India bagged the top position during the ISSF World Cup shooting organised at Delhi. India also topped the Gold Medals tally. This was possible because of the fabulous display by Indian women and men shooters. Meanwhile P V Sindhu ji has won the Silver Medal in the BWF Swiss Open Super 300 Tournament. Today, from education to entrepreneurship, armed forces to science and technology, the country’s daughters are making a distinct mark everywhere. I am especially happy that daughters are making a new place for themselves in sports. Sports  is coming up as a preferred choice in professional choices.
My dear countrymen, do you remember the Maritime India Summit held sometime ago?Do you remember what I had said at this summit? Naturally, so many programmes keep happening, so many things get said, how does one remember all and how does one pay attention either… naturally! But I felt nice that Guru Prasad ji carried forward one of my requests with interest. At this summit, I had talked of developing tourism facilities around the light house complexes in the country. Guru Prasad ji has shared experiences of his travel in 2019 to two light houses- Chennai light house and Mahabalipuram light house. He has shared very interesting facts which will astonish even the listeners of ‘Man kiBaat’. For example, Chennai light house is one of those select light houses of the world which have elevators. Not only this, it is also the only light house in India which is within the city limits. It has solar panels too for electricity. Guru Prasad ji also talked about the heritage Museum of the light house, which brings forth the history of marine navigation. Giant wicks of oil lamps, kerosene lights, petroleum vapour, and electric lamps that were used in olden times are exhibited at the museum. Guru Prasad ji has also written in detail about the oldest light house of India- Mahabalipuram light house. He says that beside this light house there is the ‘Ulkaneshwar’ temple built hundreds of years ago by Pallava king MahendraVerman First.
Friends, I have talked of different aspects of tourism several times during ‘Man kiBaat’, but these light houses are unique in terms of tourism. Because of their grand structures light houses have always been centres of attraction for people. To promote tourism 71 light houses have been identified in India too. In all these light houses, depending on their capacities, museums, amphi-theatres, open air theatres, cafeterias, children’s parks, eco friendly cottages and landscaping will bebuilt. By the way, as we are talking of light houses I would also like to tell you about a unique light house.This light house is at a place called Jinjhuwada in Surendra Nagar district of Gujarat. Do you know why this light house is special? It is special, because now the sea coast is more than a hundred kilometers away from where this light house is.  You will find such stones too in thisvillage which tell us that there must have been a busy harbour here in the past. That means, earlier the coastline was up to Jinjhuwada. Advancing, receding, moving back, retreating so far away of the sea is also a feature of it. This month it is going to be 10 years since the horrifying tsunami that hit Japan. Thousands of people had lost their lives to this tsunami. A similar tsunami had hit India in 2004. During the tsunami we lost 14 of our employees working at our light house; they were on duty at the light houses in Andaman Nicobar and Tamilnadu.I pay respectful homage to these hard workinglight keepers of ours and have high regard for their work.
Dear countrymen, novelty,modernization is essential in all fields of life, otherwise it becomes a burden at times. Modernization in the field of Indian agriculture is the need of the hour. It is already late. We have already lost a lot of time. Adopting new alternatives, new innovations, along with traditional farming, are equally important to create new opportunities for employment in the agriculture sector; to increase the income of farmers. The country has experienced it during the white revolution. Now bee farming is emerging as a similar alternative. Bee farming is becoming the foundation of a honey revolution or sweet revolution in the country. Farmers, in large numbers, of farmers are associating with it; innovating.
Just as a village Gurdum in Darjeeling, West Bengal. There are steep mountains, geographical problems, and yet, people here started the work of honey bee farming, and today, there is a sizeable demand for honey harvested at this place.This is also increasingthe income of farmers. The natural organic honey of the Sunderbans areas of West Bengal is in great demand in our country and the world. I also have had one such personal experience in Gujarat. An event was organized in the year 2016 in Banaskantha, Gujarat. In that programme, I had told the people that there were so many possibilities here… why not Banaskantha and the farmers here write a new chapter of the sweet revolution? You will be happy to know that in such a short time, Banaskantha has become a major centre for honey production. Today, farmers of Banaskantha  are earning lakhs of rupees annually through honey.
There is a similar example too from Yamuna Nagar, Haryana. In Yamuna Nagar, farmers are producing several hundred tons of honey annually, enhancing their income by doing bee farming. The result of this hard work of the farmers is that the production of honey in the country is continuously increasing, and annually, nearly 1.25 lakh tons isproduced,  and out of this produce a large quantity of honey is also being exported to foreign countries.
Friends, Honey Bee Farming do not lead to income solely from honey, but bee wax is also a very big source of income. There is demand for bee wax in everything…pharmaceutical, food,  textile and cosmetic industries Our country currently imports bee wax, but, our farmers are now rapidly transforming this situation…that is, in a way contributing in the ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ campaign. Today the whole world is looking at Ayurveda and Natural Health Products. In such a situation, the demand for honey is increasing even more rapidly. I wish more and more farmers of our country to join bee farming along with their farming. This will lead to an increase in the income of the farmers too and will also sweeten their lives!
My dear countrymen, World Sparrow Day was celebrated just a few days ago. Sparrow that is Goraiya, at places is also known aschakali, or it is also calledchimni, orghanchirika. Earlier, Goraiyawould be found chirping on theboundaries of the walls of our houses or the neighbouing trees. But now people recollectGoraiya by telling you that last they had seen Goraiyawas many years ago! Today we are required to make efforts to save it. My friend hailing from Benaras, Indrapal Singh Batra has initiated a novel effort in this direction that I would like to certainly tell this to the listeners of Mann Ki Baat. Batra Ji has turned his own house into home for the Goraiya. He got such wooden nests made in his house where theGoraiya could dwell easily. Today many homes inBenaras are joining this campaign. This has led to creating a wonderful natural environment in the houses. I would like that for nature, environment, animals, birdsor for whomsoever small or big efforts should be made by us.
Just as… a friend Bijay Kumar Kabiji. Bijayji hails from Kendrapada in Odisha. Kendrapara is on the sea coast. That’s why there are many villages in this district, which are prone to the dangers of high tides and Cyclone. This also causes  havoc at times. Bijoyji felt that if anything can stop this environmental devatation, theonly thing that can stop it, it is only nature. That is when Bijayji began his mission from the village of Barakot and for12 years… Friends, toiling for the next 12 years he raised a 25-acre mangrove forest on the outskirts of the village towards the sea. Today this forest is protecting this village. An engineer AmreshSamantji has done similar work in Paradip district of Odisha. Amreshji has planted micro- forests, which are protecting many villages today. Friends, in Endeavour’s of thesekinds, if we involve the society,great results accrue. For example, there isMarimuthuYoganathan who works as a bus conductor in Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu. Yoganathanjiwhile issuing tickets to the passengers of his busalso gives a sapling free of cost.In this way, Yoganathanji has got planted of innumerable trees! Yoganathanji has been spending a big chunk of his salary towards this work .Now after listening to this story, who as a citizen will not appreciate the work of Marimuthu Yoganathan? I heartily congratulate his efforts, for his inspirational work.
My dear countrymen, we have all seen, heard and mention to others about converting waste into wealth! In the same way, efforts of converting Waste to Value are also being attempted. One such example is that of St. Teresa’s College in Kochi, Kerala. I remember that in 2017, I attended a programme centred on  book reading on the campus of this college. Students of this college are making Reusable Toys, that too in a very creative manner. These students are converting old clothes, discarded wooden pieces, bags and Boxes into making toys. Some students are making a puzzle while another make a car orconstruct a train. Here, special attention is paid to ensure that the toys are safe as well as child friendly. And a good thing about this whole effort is that these toys are given to the Anganwadi children for them to play with. Today, while India is moving much forward in the manufacturing of toys, these campaigns from Waste to Value, these ingenious experiments mean a lot.
There is Professor Srinivasa Padkandlaji in Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh. He isdoing very interesting work. He has created sculptures from Automobile Metal Scrap. These huge sculptures made by him have been installed in public parks and people watch these with great enthusiasm. This is an innovative experiment with Electronic and Automobile Waste Recycling. I once again applaud these efforts of Kochi and Vijayawada and hope that a greater number of people will come forward in such efforts.
My dear countrymen, when people of India visit any corner of the world, they proudly say that they are Indians. We have a lot to be proud of…Our yoga, Ayurveda, philosophy and what not! That we talk about with pride.We are as well proud of our local language, dialect, identity, dress, food and drink. We have to attain the new… for that is what life is but at the same time we don’t have to lose our past! We have to work really hard to enrich the immense cultural heritage around us, for it to be passed on tothe new generation.
Today, Sikari Tissau, who lives in Assam, is doing this very diligently. Sikari Tissau ji of Karbi Anglong district has been documenting the Karbi language for the last 20 years. Once upon a time,in another era, ‘Karbi’, the language of ‘Karbi tribal’ brothers and sisters…is now disappearing from the mainstream. Shriman Sikari Tissau decided that he would protect identity of theirs… and today his efforts have resulted in documentation of much information about the Karbi language. He has also received accolades at many places for his efforts, and has also received awards. I of course congratulate Shriman Sikari Tissau ji through ‘Mann Ki Baat’, but in many corners of the country, there will be many seekers like this slogging in such initiatives and I also congratulate them all.
My dear countrymen, any new beginning is always very special. New beginning means new possibilities – New Efforts. And, new efforts mean new energy and new vigor. That is the reason it has been a tradition to observe any new beginning as a celebration in different states and regions and in our culture full of diversity. And this time is the beginning of new beginnings and arrival of new Festivals. Holi too is a tradition to celebrate Basant, spring as a festival. When we are celebrating Holi with colors, at the same time, even spring spreads new colours all around us. At this very time, flowers start blooming and nature comes alive. New year will also be celebrated in different regions of the country soon. Be it Ugadi or Puthandu, Gudi Padwa or Bihu, Navreh or Poila, or Boishakh or Baisakhi – the whole country will be drenched in the color of zeal, enthusiasm and new expectations. At the same time, Kerala also celebrates the beautiful festival of Vishu. After this, soon the holy occasion of Chaitra Navratri will also come. On the ninth day of the month of Chaitra, we have the festival of Ram Navami. It is also celebrated as the birth anniversary of Lord Rama and the beginning of a new era of justice and Parakram, valour. During this time, there is an atmosphere of devotion along with pomp around, which brings people closer, connects them with family and society, strengthens mutual relations. On the occasion of these festivals, I congratulate all the countrymen.
Friends, during this time on April 4, the country will also celebrate Easter. The festival of Easter is observed as a celebration of the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Symbolically, Easter is associated with the new beginning of life. Easter is a symbol of the resurrection of expectations.On this holy and auspicious occasion, I greet not only the Christian Community in India, but also Christians globally.
My dear countrymen, today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we talked about ‘Amrit Mahotsav’ and our duties towards the country. We also discussed other festivals and festivities. Meanwhile, another festival is arriving which reminds us of our constitutional rights and duties. That is 14 April – Birth anniversary of Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar ji. This time in the ‘Amrit Mahotsav’, this occasion has become even more special. I am sure that we will make this birth anniversary of Babasaheb a memorable one by taking a resolve of our duties and thus paying tribute to him. With this very belief, wish you all the best for the festivals once again. You all be happy, be healthy, and rejoice. With this wish, I remind you ‘dawai bhi, kadaai bhi’!
Thank you very much.


75. APRIL 25, 2021
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. Today, I am expressing Mann Ki Baat at a time when Corona is testing our patience; it is testing the limits of all of us at enduring misery. Many of our near and dear ones have left us untimely. After successfully confronting the first wave of Corona, the country was full of enthusiasm, full of self-confidence, but this storm has shaken the country.
Friends,
in the days gone by, to tide over this crisis, I had long deliberations with experts from myriad sectors. People from our Pharma industry, vaccine manufacturers, those connected with oxygen production, experts from the medical field have put forth their valuable suggestions to the government. This time, for emerging victorious in this battle, we have to accord priority to expert and scientific advice. The Government of India is applying its entire might to give a fillip to the endeavours of State Governments. The State Governments too are trying their best to fulfill their responsibilities.
Friends,
presently, the country’s doctors and health workers are waging a colossal battle against Corona. Over the past one year, they have undergone varied experiences. Joining us, at the moment, is the well known Dr Shashank Joshi ji from Mumbai.
Dr Shashank ji has immense grassroot level experience in the field of treatment of Corona and allied research. He has also been the Dean of the Indian College of Physicians. Let’s speak to Dr Shashank.
PM – Namaskar Dr Shashank ji
Dr Shashank – Namaskar Sir
PM – Just recently had got an opportunity to speak to you. I had liked the clarity in your thoughts. I felt all citizens of the country should know about your thoughts. From what we used to hear, I present it before you in the form of a question. Dr Shashank, all of you are deeply involved at the moment in saving lives, day and night…first of all, I’d like you to tell people about the Second Wave; how different it is medically, what precautions are necessary
Dr Shashank – Thank you Sir. This second deluge that has come in rapidly. This virus is faster moving than the first wave. But the good thing is that the recovery rate is higher and mortality rate pretty low. There are 2 – 3 differences here. The first is – to an extent, it has been observed in youth and children too. And the symptoms…like the earlier one…breathlessness, dry cough, fever…all these are there…along with it, loss of smell and taste are also there. And people are a bit scared. There is absolutely no need of being scared. 80 to 90 percent people do not show any of these symptoms. What they call Mutation – there’s no need to be afraid of that. These mutations keep on happening…the way we change our clothes, the virus keeps changing its colours…hence there is nothing to fear and we shall overcome this wave too. Waves keep coming and going, the virus keeps coming and going…these are the various symptoms and we have to be alert medically. Covid has a 14 to 21 day’s timetable, in which we should avail of the Doctor’s advice.
PM – Dr Shashank, the analysis that you mentioned is interesting for me too. I have received many letters containing numerous apprehensions of people regarding treatment…the demand for certain medicines is very high…that’s why I want you to tell people about the treatment of Covid, as well.
Dr Shashank – Yes Sir. People start clinical treatment very late…in the belief that the illness will subside on its own…they believe in what they keep watching on their Mobile feeds. If they abide by information provided by the government, they will not face these difficulties. In Covid, the clinical treatment protocol has magnitude of three types – light or mild Covid, medium or moderate Covid and intense, what is called severe Covid. In the case of mild Covid, we do oxygen monitoring, pulse monitoring and fever monitoring. If the fever rises, sometimes we use medicines like paracetamol…and one should consult a Doctor. In the case of moderate or severe Covid, it is extremely important to contact the Doctor. Correct and inexpensive medicines are available. Steroids can save life…inhalers can be given, tablets can be given. And along with that, oxygen has to be administered…there are many simple treatments available. But often what is happening is – there is a new experimental medicine called Remdesivir. But one thing about this medicine is that one has to stay 2 – 3 days lesser in the hospital and it aids in clinical recovery. And this medicine too works only when it is taken in the first 9-10 days…and it is to be taken only for five days. The way people are running after Remdesivir…they should stop doing that. This medicine has a limited role…it should be taken only when people are put on oxygen in a hospital, strictly as per the Doctor’s advice. It is important for all people to understand this. If we do PRANAYAM, our lungs will expand a bit. And there’s an injection available for thinning blood…it is called Heparin. If these simple medicines are given, 98% people recover. So, staying positive is very important. It is imperative that treatment protocol is as per the Doctor’s advice. And it is not at all required to run after all these expensive medications. Sir, we have excellent treatments, we have oxygen, we have ventilator facilities…we have everything Sir. Whenever this medicine is available, it should be given only to appropriate people. On this, many myths are doing the rounds. Sir, I want to clarify that we have the world’s best treatment available…you will see that India has the best recovery rate. If you compare Europe, America, our patients are recovering through our treatment protocols.
PM – Dr Shashank, many thanks to you. The pieces of information that Dr Shashank gave us are very important and useful for all of us.
Friends,
I urge all of you…if you need any information, if you have any apprehension, get the information only from the correct source. You can consult your family doctor or doctors in the neighbourhood on the phone. I am noticing that many of our doctors are taking upon themselves this responsibility, on their own. Many doctors are providing information to people through social media. They are counseling on phone and WhatsApp. Many hospitals have websites where information is available…there you can seek advice of doctors too. This is commendable.
Joining me is Dr Naveed Nazeer Shah from Srinagar. Dr Naveed is a professor at a Government Medical College in Srinagar. Naveed ji has cured many a Corona patient under his supervision. In this holy month of Ramzan, Dr Naveed is performing his duty and has also taken out time to talk to us. Come, let’s speak to him.
PM – Naveed ji namaskar
Dr Naveed – Namaskar Sir
PM – Dr Naveed, during these difficult times, our listeners of Mann ki Baat have raised the question of Panic Management. Through your experience, what will you answer them?
Dr Naveed – See, when Corona began, the first hospital in Kashmir to be designated as Covid Hospital was our City Hospital, which comes under a medical college. The atmosphere then was that of fear. At least in people, it was so. They used to feel that perhaps, if a person contracts Covid, it would be taken as a Death Sentence. And amidst that, the doctors and paramedical staff working at our hospital also underwent that sense of fear…how will we face these patients…aren’t we at a risk of contracting the infection! But as time passed, we too observed that if we wear protective gear fully, abide by precautions colllectively; we too, including our staff can stay safe. As time passed by, we kept on noticing that some patients or people who were ill were asymptomatic, who displayed no symptoms of the infection. We saw that close to 90-95% of the patients are those who recover without in-medication…thus, with the passage of time, the fear of corona in the minds of people largely reduced. Today what we refer to as the Second Wave that has come in this time…there is no need to panic this time around too. Amidst this occurrence too, if we adhere to the protective measures, the SOPs such as wearing masks, using hand sanitizers…beyond that, if we maintain physical distance and avoid social gathering, we can carry on with our daily work and keep ourselves protected from this infection too.
Modi ji- Dr. Naveed people have many questions regarding the vaccine too, like how much protection we will get from the vaccine, how assured we can feel after the vaccine? Tell us something about this; listeners will be greatly benefitted.
Dr. Naveed- From the time since the corona infection has surfaced before us, till today, we don’t have any effective treatment available…we can fight this disease with only two things -one is protective measures … and we have already been saying that if we get some effective vaccine we can overcome this disease. Our country presently has two vaccines available Covaccine and Covishield which have been made here itself. Other companies too who have done their trials have found that its efficacy is more than 60%. And if we talk of Jammu Kashmir, till now, 15 to 16 lakh people have taken the vaccine. Yes, quite a few misconceptions or myths about this have come up on social media enumerating the side effects … till now, in our place, no side effects have been found in vaccines that have been administered. Only things that are routinely associated with every vaccine – someone getting fever, ache in the entire body or getting pain locally where injection is applied- we have seen such side effects in all patients ;we have not seen any gross adverse effect. And yes , secondly,some people had the apprehension that after vaccination, that is on getting the vaccine, some people got positive. In this, companies themselves have given guidelines that if someone is vaccinated, they may have infection, they can get positive. But the severity of the disease, that is its intensity in such patients will not be so much, that is, they may get positive but the disease can not prove to be fatal in them. So we should remove from our mind such misconception about the vaccine. Whosoever’s turn comes…Because from 1st May, vaccine administration programme for all those above 18 years in the entire country will begin, it is an appeal to the people that come and get vaccinated and protect yourselves and overall, our society and our community will be protected from Covid 19 infection.
Modi ji- Dr Naveed many many thanks to you, and best wishes to you for the pious month of Ramazan.
Dr. Naveed- Many many thanks.
Modi ji: Friends, in this period of Corona crisis, all are getting aware of the importance of vaccine … so it is my appeal that don’t get swayed by any rumour about the vaccine. You all must be knowing that people above 45 years of age can benefit from the free vaccine that has been sent to all state governments by the government of India. Now from 1st May onwards ,the vaccine is going to be made available for every person above 18 years in the country. Now the Corporate Sector, companies too will be able to participate in the programme of administering vaccine to their employees. I also want to say that the programme of free vaccine by the government of India that is going on now will continue further too. I appeal also to the states to extend the benefit of this free vaccine campaign of government of India to maximum number of the people of their state.
Friends,
we all know how difficult mentally it is to take care of ourselves, our family during disease. But our nursing staff in hospitals has to do this very job continuously, with so many patients at the same time. This sense of service is a great strength of our society. Only a nurse can tell properly about the service and hard work of the nursing staff. That is why, in Mann Ki Baat, I have invited sister Bhavana Dhruv ji who is providing her services at B R Ambedkar Medical College in Raipur. She is taking care of several Corona patients. Come , let us talk to her.
Modi ji- Namaskaar Bhavana ji!
Bhavana-Respected Prime Minister ji, Namaskar!
Modi ji- Bhavana ji…
Bhavan- Yes sir
Modi ji- Do tell the audience of Mann Ki Baat how you have so many responsibilities in family, so much multitasking and yet, along with that, you are working with Corona patients. The experience that you have with Corona patients, people of the country would definitely like to hear that because sisters, nurses are closest to the patient for the longest duration, so they can understand every aspect in great detail…please tell us.
Bhavana- Yes Sir… my total experience in COVID is 2 months. We do our duties for 14 days and after that we are given rest. Then after 2 months our Covid duties are repeated sir. When I was put on Covid duty for the first time, first of all I shared this Covid duty part with my family members. This was in May. And as I shared this, all got scared, worried … they started telling me that I should work with care…it was an emotional situation Sir. When my daughter asked me, “Mamma you are going for Covid duty?”… it was a very emotional moment for me. But when I went near a Covid patient, I had left a responsibility at home. And when I met Covid patients Sir, they were much more frightened than them. All the patients were so frightened by the name Covid that they were not able to understand what was happening to them or what we would do further. To remove their fear we gave them a very healthy environment. When we were told to do COVID duty, first of all, we were asked to wear a PPE Kit, which is quite difficult… to do duty with the PPE Kit on. Sir this was very tough for us …in 2 months duty, I have worked everywhere …14- 14 days duty in wards, in ICU, in Isolation.
Modi ji- That means, in all, you have been doing this very work for the past one year.
Bhavana- Yes Sir; before going there I did not know who my colleagues were. I worked as a team member… whatever problem they had… I shared, I came to know about the patients and removed their stigma, there were many people who were frightened of even the name of Covid. They showed all symptoms… when we used to take their history, but because of fear they wouldn’t be able to get their test done, then we would counsel them … and Sir when severity would increase, by then their lungs would have already been infected…by the time they came they would need ICU by then and with them their entire family would come. So I have seen 1-2 such cases sir and not just that …I have worked with all age groups. In that were small kids, ladies, men, senior citizens… all kinds of patients sir. When we talked to them they said that they did not come because of fear, we got the same answer from all. Then we counselled them Sir, that there is nothing to fear, just follow us … we will support you … follow whatever protocol is there. We could do only this much for them.
Modi ji- Bhavana ji, I felt nice talking to you, you have given me quite good information. You have shared by your experience, definitely this will send a message of positivity to the countrymen. Many many thanks to you Bhavana ji.
Bhavan- Thank you so much sir…thank you so much….Jain Hind sir.
Modi ji- Jai Hind!
Hundreds of thousands of brothers and sisters like Bhavana Ji and countless others from Nursing Staff are performing their duties exemplarily. This is a big inspiration for all of us. Pay special attention to your health as well. Take care of your family too.
Friends, Sister Surekha ji is now connected with us from Bengaluru at this time. Surekha Ji is Senior Nursing Officer in K.C. General Hospital. Come let us get to know about her experiences also –
Modi ji: Namaste Surekha ji!
Surekha: – I am really proud and honored sir to speak to prime minister of our country.
Modi Ji:- Surekha ji…You along with all fellow nurses and hospital staff are doing excellent work. India is thankful to you all. What is your message for the citizens in this fight against COVID-19.
Surekha:- Yes sir… Being a responsible citizen I would really like to tell something like please be humble to your neighbors and early testing and proper tracking help us to reduce the mortality rate and moreover please if you find any symptoms isolate yourself and consult nearby doctors and get treated as early as possible. So, community need to know awareness about this disease and be positive, don’t be panic and don’t be stressed out. It worsens the condition of the patient. We are thankful to our Government proud to have a vaccine also and I am already vaccinated with my own experience I wanted to tell the citizens of India, no vaccine provides 100% protection immediately. It takes time to build immunity. Please don’t be scared to get vaccinated. Please vaccinate yourself; there is a minimal side effects and I want to deliver the message like, stay at home, stay healthy, avoid contact with the people who are sick and avoid touching the nose, eyes and mouth unnecessarily. Please practice physically distancing, wear mask properly, wash your hands regularly and home remedies you can practice in the house. Please drink ayurvedic kaadha(आयुर्वेदिककाढ़ा), take steam inhalation and mouth gargling everyday and breathing exercise also you can do it. And one more thing last and not the least please have a sympathy towards frontline workers and professionals. We need your support and co-operation. We will fight together. We will get through with the pandemic. This is what my message to the people sir.
Modi ji:- Thank you surekha ji.
Surekha:- Thank you sir.
Surekha ji, indeed, you are holding fort in a very difficult time. Take care of yourself! I wish the very best for your family. I will also urge the people of the country, as Bhavna Ji, Surekha ji, have narrated from their experiences. Positive Spirit is imperative to fight Corona and the countrymen have to maintain the very same positive spirit.
My dear friends,
along with Doctors and Nursing Staff, at the moment frontline Workers like Lab-Technicians and Ambulance Drivers are also working in a godlike manner ! When an Ambulance reaches a patient, the family feels as if an angel has visited them in form of an Ambulance Driver! The country must know about all the services rendered by them & about their experiences! I have one such gentleman with me right now – Mr. Prem Verma ji, who is an Ambulance Driver. As his name denotes, Prem Verma ji does his work, his duty, with full love and dedication. Come! Let’s talk to him –
Modi ji – Namaste Prem ji |
Prem ji – Namaste sir ji |
Mr. Modi – Bhai! Prem |
Prem ji – yes sir.
Modi ji – About your work.
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – Do tell us in detail. Also tell us about your experiences.
Prem ji – I am on the post of driver with CATS Ambulance and as soon as Control gives us a call on a tab… We respond to the call that comes from 102 and head towards the patient. We go to the patient and for the last two years we are continuing this work. We wear our kit, wearing our gloves & mask, reach the patient and wherever they ask us to drop, in whichever hospital, we drop them as soon as possible.
Modi ji – You must have had both doses of vaccine?
Prem ji – Absolutely sir.
Modi ji – Then what is your message for others to get vaccinated?
Prem ji – Sir Absolutely | Everyone should get this dose and it is good for the family as well. Now my mom insists that I quit this job. I told her- mother, if I too leave the job and sit idle, then who will carry these patients? Because everyone is deserting, leaving behind their jobs in this period of corona! Everyone is leaving the job. Mom tells me to leave that job. I said no mom, I will not leave the job!
Modi ji – Prem Ji do not hurt mother. Try to convince your mother.
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – But this thing you told about your mother?
Prem ji – Yes.
Modi ji – It is very touching.
Prem ji – Yes.
Modi ji – To your mother too.
Prem ji – Yes.
Modi ji – Do convey my pranam.
Prem ji – Absolutely
Mr. Modi – And Yes?
Prem ji – yes Sir
Modi ji – and Prem ji through you
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – These drivers running our ambulance service too
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – How much risk you all taking at your jobs!
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – and what does everyone’s mother think?
Prem ji – Absolutely sir
Modi ji – When this conversation will reach the audience
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – I definitely believe that it will touch their hearts too!
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – thank you very much, Prem ji. In a way, you are an example of what we call the flow of the Ganges of love!
Prem ji – Thank you sir
Modi ji – thanks bhaiyya!
Prem ji – Thank you.
Friends,
Prem Verma ji and thousands of people like him today are serving the people by putting their own lives at stake! Ambulance Drivers have also contributed a lot to all the lives that have been saved in this fight against Corona. Premji, I commend you and all your colleagues across the country. keep reaching on time, keep saving lives!
My dear countrymen, it is true that many people are getting infected with Corona. However, the number of people recovering from Corona is equally high. Preeti Chaturvedi of Gurugram has also recently defeated Corona. Preeti ji is joining us in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Her experiences will be of immense benefit for all of us.
Modi ji : Preeti ji, Namaste
Preeti ji : Namaste Sir. How are you doing?
Modi ji : I am fine . First of all, as for Covid19
Preeti ji : Ji
Modi ji : you successfully overcame it
Preeti ji : Ji
Modi ji : I would like to appreciate you for that.
Preeti ji : Thank you so much Sir
Modi ji : I wish for the faster recovery of your health
Preeti ji : Ji thank you Sir
Modi ji : Preeti ji
Preeti ji : Yes Sir
Modi ji : Is it just you who got infected in the current wave or have other members of your family been affected by it too?
Preeti ji : No no Sir, it was just me
Modi ji : God has been kind. Well, I would like
Preeti ji : Yes Sir
Modi ji : That you share some experiences of the state of your suffering … then, perhaps those listening in right now may also get guidance on how to handle themselves at such a time.
Preeti ji : Sure Sir. In the initial stage, I got extremely lethargic and after that there was a slight soreness of the throat. I felt that these were symptoms and so I got myself tested. On the second day, as soon as the report came in and I was diagnosed positive, I quarantined myself. I isolated myself in a room and consulted with doctors. I started the prescribed medication .
Modi ji : So your family was saved due to quick action on your part.
Preeti ji : Yes Sir. They got tested later too.Everyone else was negative. I was the only positive. Prior to that, I had isolated myself inside a room. After keeping all my necessities, I locked myself in the room. And along with that, I again started medication with the doctor. Sir, along with medication, I started yoga &Ayurvedic.Along with that I also started taking kadha, decoction. In order to boost my immunity Sir, in the day, whenever I used to take my food, I took healthy food, which was a protein rich diet. I took a lot of fluid, I gargled , inhaled steam and took hot water. I incorporated all of this as part of my daily routine. And Sir, I would like to say that these days, the most important thing is … one shouldn’t get worried at all. One has to remain mentally strong and for me, yoga and breathing exercise helped and I felt better doing them.
Modi ji : Yes. Preeti ji, now that your process is complete, you have come out of the crisis
Preeti ji : Yes Sir
Modi ji : You have tested negative too…
Preeti ji : Yes Sir
Modi ji : So what are you doing right now to take care of your health?
Preeti ji : Sir, I have not stopped doing Yoga
Modi ji : Ok
Preeti ji : I am still taking decoction and to boost my immunity, I am eating good, healthy food.
Modi ji : Yes
Preeti ji : I used to earlier neglect my own self but now I pay a lot of attention to my own being.
Modi ji : Thank you Preeti ji
Preeti ji : Thank you so much Sir.
Modi ji : I think the information you shared will help a lot of people. May you stay healthy; may your family members stay healthy, I wish you all the best.
My dear countrymen,
today, our personnel from the medical field, frontline workers are all endeavouring 24×7 in service work. Similarly, other people of the society also are not lagging behind at this time. The country is once again united and fighting against Corona. These days, I see that someone is delivering medicines to families living in quarantine, someone is sending vegetables, milk, fruits etc. Someone is offering free ambulance services to patients. Even in such challenging times, in different corners of the country, voluntary organizations are coming forward and trying to do whatever they can to help others. This time, new awareness is also being seen in the villages. By strictly following the Covid rules, people are protecting their village from the corona, proper arrangements are also being made for those who are coming from outside. Many young people have also come forward in the cities, working together with the local residents, in order to prevent the rise of Corona cases in their area. Meaning, on the one hand, the country is working day and night for hospitals, ventilators and medicines and on the other hand, the countrymen are also fighting the challenge of Corona with a lot of heart. This resolve gives us so much strength, so much confidence. Whatever efforts are being made are of great service to the society. They strengthen the power of society.
My dear countrymen,
today we kept the entire conversation of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ focused on the corona pandemic, because, today, our biggest priority is to defeat this disease. Today is also Bhagwan Mahavir Jayanti. On this occasion, I convey my good wishes to all the countrymen. The messages of Bhagwan Mahavir inspire us towards perseverance and self-restraint. The holy month of Ramzan is also going on. There is also Buddha Purnima ahead. There is also the 400th Prakash Parv of Guru Tegh Bahadur ji. A landmark day ahead is PochisheBoishak – Tagore Jayanti. All these inspire us to perform our duties. As a citizen, the more we perform our duties with efficiency in our lives, the faster we will move on the path of the future, free from crisis. With this wish, I once again urge all of you to get vaccinated and we also have to take full care. ‘Dawaibhi, Kadaibhi’ – Get vaccinated and maintain all precautions. Never forget this mantra. We will soon prevail together over this calamity. With this belief, I thank you all very much. Namaskar!


77. MAY 30, 2021
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. We are seeing how the country is fighting against Covid-19 with all her might. This has been the biggest pandemic in the last hundred years and during this very pandemic, India has confronted many a natural disaster with fortitude. Meanwhile, there were cyclone Amphan and cyclone Nisarg…many states had floods…there were many minor and major earthquakes; there were landslides. Just recently, in the past ten days, the country faced two major cyclones – cyclone Taukte on the west coast and cyclone Yaas on the east coast. Both these cyclones affected a number of States. The country and her people fought them with all their strength, ensuring minimum loss of life. We experience now that compared to earlier times, we are being able to save the lives of maximum people. Under these trying and extraordinary calamitous circumstances, people of all these cyclone affected States have displayed courage…they’ve faced this moment of crisis with immense patience and discipline. I wish to commend all citizens respectfully, wholeheartedly. People who led rescue and relief work deserve more appreciation than can be expressed. I salute all of them. The Centre, State governments and local administration have come together to face this calamity. My heart goes out to all the people who’ve lost their near and dear ones. Let us all firmly stand by those who have borne the brunt of this disaster.
My dear countrymen, however big the challenge be, India’s victory-resolve, her Vijay-Sankalp has always been equal in magnitude. Her collective strength and our spirit of service has always rescued the country from the midst of every storm. We’ve seen in the days gone by how our doctors, nurses and frontline warriors have toiled day and night without bothering about themselves, and continue to do so. Amidst all this, there indeed are people who’ve played a major role in the fight against the second wave of Corona. Many listeners of Mann Ki Baat, on NamoApp and through letters, have urged me to touch upon these warriors.
Friends, when the second wave came, the demand for oxygen surged all of a sudden…this was a very big challenge…delivering medical oxygen to remote parts of the country was indeed a huge task. If an oxygen tanker moves fast, the slightest error can lead to the risk of a big explosion. Many plants manufacturing industrial oxygen are located in the eastern parts of the country…transporting oxygen from there to other states of the country requires many days. In confronting this challenge, the country was helped by cryogenic tanker drivers, the Oxygen Express and Air Force pilots…many such people worked on a war footing, saving the lives of hundreds of thousands of people. Joining us in Mann Ki Baat today is one such friend – Shriman Dinesh Upadhyay ji, resident of Jaunpur, U.P.
Modi ji – Dinesh ji, Namaskar
Dinesh Upadhyay ji – Sir ji Pranaam.
Modi ji – First of all, I’d want you to definitely tell us something about yourself.
Dinesh ji – Sir, my name is Dinesh Babulnath Upadhyay. I am a resident of village Hasanpur, Post Jamua, District Jaunpur.
Modi ji – You are from U.P.!
Dinesh ji – Yes…Yes Sir
Modi ji – Ji
Dinesh ji – And Sir, I have a son, two daughters…also my wife and parents.
Modi ji – And what do you do?
Dinesh ji – Sir, I drive an oxygen tanker…for liquid oxygen.
Modi ji – Are the children carrying on well with their studies?
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir. They are studying. Both daughters as well as the son are studying Sir.
Modi ji – Are their online studies going on well?
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir, they are doing it well. Right now, my daughters are studying, that too online Sir. I’ve been driving an oxygen tanker for 15 – 17 years Sir.
Modi ji – Okay, you’ve been transporting oxygen for 15 – 17 years! Then you are not just a truck driver! In a way, you are engaged in saving the lives of lakhs of people.
Dinesh ji – Sir, our line of work is like that! Sir, our Company of oxygen tankers, Inox Company also takes good care of us. And wherever we deliver oxygen, it gives us a lot of happiness.
Modi ji – But during these Corona times, your responsibilities have increased a lot!
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir, it has increased a lot.
Modi ji – When you are on the driving seat of your truck, what thoughts cross your mind? Any new experience compared to earlier times? There must be a lot of pressure…a lot of stress! Concerns regarding the family, the Corona atmosphere, pressures from people, demands! What all must be happening!
Dinesh ji – Sir, that doesn’t bother us. For us, it’s just that we are fulfilling our duty…if delivering oxygen on time gives life to someone, it is a matter of great honour for us.
Modi ji – You are expressing your sentiment very well. Okay, tell us…today, during these pandemic times when people are noticing the importance of your work, which perhaps they didn’t realise earlier…has it led to a change in the way they view you and your work?
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir. Earlier, oxygen drivers like us used to be caught up in jams, somewhere or the other. But in present times, the administration has helped us a lot. And wherever we go, we feel an inner eagerness within…how soon can we reach and save people’s lives! Whether one gets to eat or not…or facing any other problem…when we reach hospital with the tanker, we see people at the hospital there gesturing at us with a V sign…people whose family members are admitted.
Modi ji – Okay, they indicate the V for victory!
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir. Some show a V, others raise a thumbs up. It gives us a lot of satisfaction…we must have done a good deed in life to get an opportunity to offer such service.
Modi ji – All your fatigue must be vanishing!
Dinesh ji – Yes…Yes Sir.
Modi ji – So, do you come home and tell your children about that?
Dinesh ji – No sir. My children stay in the village. I am here at Inox Air Products as a driver.I go home after 8-9 months.
Modi ji – So, at times, you must be talking to the children on the phone!
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir. Regularly.
Modi ji – Then they must be feeling that their father should take care of himself amidst all this!
Dinesh ji – Sir, they say, “Papa, work…but do it with along with your own safety.” And we work with safety. We have a plant in Maangaon too. Inox helps us a lot.
Modi ji – Fine. Dinesh ji, I felt really nice listening to you. And even the country will get to know how people are working in this fight against Corona. For nine odd months, you are not meeting your children and family, just to ensure that people’s lives are saved. When the country listens to this, she will feel proud that we shall win the battle, since lakhs of people like Dinesh Upadhyaya ji are persevering, leaving no stone unturned!
Dinesh ji – Sir, one day or the other, we shall certainly defeat Corona!
Modi ji – Fine Dinesh ji…your sentiment is the strength of the country. Many thanks Dinesh ji. And please convey my blessings to your children.
Dinesh ji – Shall do it Sir. Pranaam.
Modi ji – Thank you.
Dinesh ji – Pranaam, pranaam.
Modi ji – Thank you.
Friends, truly, as Dinesh ji was mentioning, when a tanker driver reaches a hospital with oxygen, he comes across as a godsent messenger. We can understand the magnitude of responsibility involved in such work…and the resultant mental pressure one undergoes.
Friends, at this very moment of challenge, to facilitate transportation of oxygen, Indian Railway too has stepped forward. Oxygen Express, oxygen rail has transported larger quantities of oxygen to all corners of the country, faster than oxygen tankers travelling by road. Mothers and sisters would be proud to hear that one oxygen express is being run fully by women. Every woman of the country will feel proud at that. Not just that, every Indian will feel proud. I have invited Shirisha Gajni, a loco pilot of Oxygen Express, to Mann Ki Baat.
Modi ji- Shirisha ji namastey!
Shirisha- Namastey sir! How are you?
Modi ji- I am very fine. Shirisha ji, I have heard that you are working as a railway pilot and I was told that your entire team of women is running this oxygen express. Shirisha ji you are doing a wonderful work. During corona times many women like you have come forward to give strength to the country to fight corona. You too are a very big example of woman power. But the country would like to know, I want to know where do you get this motivation from?
Shirisha- Sir, for me my motivation are my father – mother, sir. My father is a government employee, sir. Actually I have two elder sisters, sir. We are three members, ladies only but my father encourages us to work. My first sister is doing a government job in bank and I am settled in railways. My parents are very encouraging.
Modi ji- Ok Shirisha ji, you have served railways during normal days too. You have driven trains routinely but on the one hand there was so much demand for oxygen….you were ferrying oxygen… then it must have been a task with much responsibility; being a bit more responsible. Ferrying normal goods is a different matter, Oxygen is a very delicate thing too, what experience did you undergo?
Shirisha- I felt happy in doing this work. During oxygen special time I observed all – safety wise, formation wise and for any leakage. Next, Indian Railway too is supportive, sir. I was given green path to drive this oxygen, I reached 125 kilometres in one and a half hour with this train. Railway took this much responsibility, I also took responsibility, sir.
Modi ji- Great… Shirisha ji I congratulate you a lot and convey my special pranam to your father- mother who motivated their three daughters so much and promoted them greatly and thus encouraged them. And I feel… pranam to such parents too and to you all sisters as well who served the country like this and displayed such a spirit also. Many many thanks Shirisha ji.
Shirish- Thanks sir. Thank you, sir. I need your blessings.
Modi ji- May the blessings of All Mighty remain with you, blessings of mother-father be with you. Thanks ji.
Shirisha- Thanks sir.
Friends, just now we heard Shirisha ji. Her experiences inspire us, make us emotional too. In fact, this battle is so big… that in this like the railways our country is working through all the three ways- water, land, sky. On the one hand empty tankers are being flown to oxygen plants by Air Force planes, on the other, work on construction of new oxygen plants too is being completed. Along with that, oxygen, oxygen concentrators and cryogenic tankers from abroad also are being brought into the country. That is why, in this task Navy , Air Force, Army and our institutions like DRDO are also involved. So many of our scientists, industry experts and technicians too are working on a war footing. The countrymen are keen to know and to understand the work of all of them. That is why Group Captain Patnaik ji from the Air Force is joining us.
Modi ji- Patnaik ji, Jai Hind.
Grp. Cpt.- Sir Jai Hind. Sir I am Group Captain A.K. Patanik. Speaking from Air Force station Hindon.
Modi ji- Patnaik ji, during the war against corona you are handling a big responsibility. Going around the world to bring tankers, delivering tankers here. I would like to know as a soldier you have done a different kind of work. One has to run in warfare; today you are running to save lives. How are you feeling?
Group Captain- Sir we are fortunate to be able to help our countrymen at this moment of crisis. And these missions that have been assigned to us we are fulfilling them very well. Our training and support services that we have are assisting us fully and the best thing, Sir, is that the job satisfaction derived is of a very high level. And this is why we are able to do continuous operations.
Modi ji- Captain the efforts that you made these days… that too you had to do in very short time…How have you been placed these days?.
Group Captain- Sir, from the last one month we have been continuously lifting oxygen tankers and liquid oxygen containers from both domestic and international destinations, Sir. Sir, the Air force has completed more than about 1600 sorties and we have flown more than 3000 hours. We have completed nearly 160 international missions; due to which, from all places, oxygen tankers from domestic destinations which earlier took two to three days, now we can deliver from one place to another in two to three hours; in international missions too within 24 hours by doing continuous round the clock operations… Entire Air Force is engaged in this so that we can help the country by bringing in as many tankers as soon as possible.
Modi ji- Captain, internationally what all places did you have to run around?
Grp Cpt.- Sir, for us on short notice to Singapore, Dubai, Belgium, Germany and UK. To all these places different fleets of the Indian Air Force sir, IL-76 , C-17 and other planes had gone… C-130 which had gone by planning at very short notice. Because of our training and zeal, we were able to complete these missions timely sir.
Modi ji- See this time the country feels proud that whether it is water, land, sky our soldiers are engaged in fighting the battle against corona and captain you have fulfilled a big responsibility…many congratulations to you.
Group Captain- Sir thank you so much sir. We are trying our best. My daughter Aditi too is with me Sir.
Modi ji- That is nice!
Aditi- Namastey Modi ji
Modi ji- Namastey beti,namastey. Aditi how old are you?
Aditi- I am 12 years old and I study in class 8th.
Modi ji- So your father goes out, is in uniform!
Aditi-Yes! I feel very proud of him. Feel very proud that he is doing all this important work, helping so many people suffering from corona and bringing oxygen tankers and containers from so many countries.
Modi ji- But the daughter does miss her father so much, doesn’t she?
Aditi- Yes, I miss him a lot. Now a days he is not able to stay home much as he is going on so many international flights and delivering containers and tankers to production plants so that the people suffering from corona can get oxygen timely and their lives can be saved.
Modi ji- So beti, this work of saving lives through oxygen is now known to people in every house hold.
Aditi- Yes.
Modi ji – When your friend circle, your fellow students learn that your father is engaged in oxygen service, they must be looking at you with great respect?
Aditi – Yes, all my friends also say that your father is doing such an important job and you must be feeling very proud and it is then I do feel extremely proud and all of my family, my maternal grandparents, paternal grandmother, all of them are very proud of my father… my mother and her doctor colleagues they are also working day and night… and all the Armed Forces, uncles in my father’s squadron, and all the forces, all of the people, the army is working quite a lot….and I am sure that with everyone’s efforts, we will definitely win this battle against Corona.
Modi ji –It is said here that when a daughter speaks, Goddess Saraswati is very much present in her words and when Aditi is saying that we will definitely win, then in a way it becomes the voice of God. Ok Aditi, right now you must be studying online?
Aditi – Yes, right now all our classes are going on online and right now we are taking full precautions at home… and if one has to go out, then you must wear a double mask and everything else…we are maintaining all precautions and personal hygiene. We are observing safeguards with regards to everything.
Modi ji –Good beta, what are your hobbies? What do you like?
Aditi – My hobbies are swimming and basketball but now that has stopped a bit and during this lockdown and corona virus I have become very fond of baking and cooking and I do all the baking and cooking for my dad so when he returns after doing so much work then I make cookies and cakes for him!
Modi ji –Wah! It is really nice! Alright Beta after a long time you have got a chance to spend some time with your father, and it feels very good and I congratulate you captain and when I congratulate the captain I mean not only him but all our Forces-navy, army and air force, I salute everyone, the way they are operating cohesively! Thank you brother.
Grp. Cpt. – Thank You Sir.
PM Modi- Friends, the nation salutes these soldiers of ours, these warriors of ours for the work that they have done. Similarly, millions of people are toiling day and night. The tasks they are performing is not part of their routine work. This type of disaster has hit the world in a hundred years. We have met such a big calamity after a century, therefore, no one had any experience of this kind of work. Behind it lies the spirit of service for the country, and power of resolve. This is why the country has been able to do work that has never been done before. You can guess for yourself, in normal circumstances we used to produce 900 Metric Tonnes of liquid medical oxygen in a day. Now, it has expanded to generating more than 10 times the normal output and producing around 9500 Metric Tonnes per day. Our warriors are transporting this oxygen to far-flung corners of the country.
My dear countrymen, so many efforts were made in the country to distribute and provide oxygen, so many people came together that as a citizen, all these endeavors inspire you. Everyone has done their duty as part of a team. I have been told by Urmila ji from Bengaluru that her husband is a lab technician, and how he has been continuously performing task of testing in the midst of so many challenges.
Friends, at the beginning of Corona, there was only one testing lab in the country, but today more than two and a half thousand labs are in operation. Initially, only a few hundred tests could be conducted in a day, now more than 20 lakh tests are being carried out in a single day. So far, more than 33 crore samples have been tested in the country. This huge task is made possible only because of our colleagues like those mentioned. There are countless frontline workers engaged in the work of sample collection, going amidst infected patients, and taking their sample is an example of yeoman service. To protect themselves, these friends have to wear PPE Kit continuously even in sweltering heat. After that the sample reaches the lab. Therefore, when I was reading your suggestions and queries, I decided that these friends engaged in such services should also be discussed. We will also get to know a lot from their experiences. So now let’s talk to our friend Prakash Kandpal ji who works as a lab technician in Delhi.
Modi ji – Prakash ji Namaskar
Prakash Ji – Namaskar respected Prime Minister ji
Modi ji – Prakash ji, first of all tell about yourself to all of our listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. How long have you been doing this work and what has been your experience during the time of Corona, because the people of the country neither get to see you on television nor appear in newspapers, even then working and living in the lab like a sage! So I would like that through your account the countrymen will also get information about how work is going on in the country.
Prakash ji – I have been working as a lab technician for the last 10 years in the hospital called Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, an autonomus institution, under the Government of Delhi. My experience in health sector is of 22 years. Even before ILBS, I have worked in prestigious institutions like Apollo Hospital, Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Hospital, Rotary Blood Bank, Delhi. Sir, although in all of these medical institutions I served in the blood bank department, but since 1st April, 2020 last year, I have been working in the Covid testing lab under the Virology department of ILBS.
Undoubtedly during the Covid pandemic, there was a lot of strain on all the means and resources related to health but I personally consider this phase of cataclysm as an opportunity during which the nation, humanity, society expects and hopes for display of all that more responsibility, cooperation, strength and capability from us. And sir, when according to the expectation and hope of the nation, humanity and society, we function at our optimum which is equal to a drop of water, we work according to those standards and measure upto them, then there is a feeling of pride. Sometimes when our family members are apprehensive or even a little scared, on such an occasion, I remind them that the soldiers of our country on the borders who are always away from their families protecting the country in dire and extraordinary circumstances, compared to them whatever risk we undertake is less, is very less. So they too understand this thing and in a way they also cooperate with me and they also contribute in whatever kind of cooperation there is during the time of this calamity.
Modi ji – Prakash ji, on one hand the government is advocating everyone to keep a distance –or maintain distance from each other during the Corona pandemic. And you have to be in the midst of the corona virus by being at the forefront. You have to encounter it from the front. So it is a life-threatening affair in itself, and therefore it is very natural for the family to be worried. But still, this lab technician’s job is one of the common professions. And in such a pandemic, another dimension gets added to the work that you are doing. Therefore the working hours must have increased. You must be spending many an overnight in the lab. And because so many crores of people are being tested, the burden must have also increased. But for your own safety also, do you take precautions or not?
Prakash ji –Yes Sir, we do. Our ILBS lab is accredited by WHO, and thus all the protocols observed are of international standards. We follow the three-tier safety protocol with regards to our dress. We go to lab in it, and wearing it we work. And then there is a complete protocol of discarding the dress, another for labelling and also for testing! We work under these protocols. So sir, it is God’s grace that my family and most of my acquaintances are still untouched by this infection. And there is one thing that, if you are careful and observe caution you can avoid it to an extent.
Modi ji – Prakash ji, thousands of people like you have been stationed in the labs for the last one year and have been doing such arduous work, saving innumerable people, about which the nation is getting to know today! Prakash ji, through you I, thank all the members of your fraternity. I thank you wholeheartedly on behalf of the countrymen. And you stay healthy. May you and your family stay healthy. I wish you all the best.
Prakash Ji – Thank you, Prime Minister ji. I am very grateful to you for giving me this opportunity.
Mr. Modi – Thank you brother.
PM Modi: Friends, I may have conversed with Bhai Prakash ji but in way, through his words, the fragrance of service rendered by thousands of lab technicians is reaching us. In his words you not only get a glimpse of the sense of service evident in thousands and lakhs of people but we also come to realize our responsibility. The kind of hard work and commitment that our friends like Bhai Prakash ji are putting in their work, that very quantum of cooperation from them will greatly help in defeating Corona.
My dear countrymen, while at present we were discussing our ‘Corona Warriors’ we have been a witness of their dedication and hard work in the last one and a half years. But there also has been a very big role in this fight displayed by many such warriors across the country. Think for yourself, our country faced such a big crisis that it affected every system of the country. The agricultural sector protected itself from this attack to a great extent. Not only did it keep itself safe, but the sector also progressed, moving forward. Do you know that even in this pandemic, our farmers have achieved record produce! The farmers produced record output and this time the country went on to procure record amount of crops. This time in many places farmers have got more than the minimum support price (MSP) for mustard. Due to the record food grain production, our country has been able to provide support to every countryman. Today, 800 million underprivileged denizens are being provided free ration in this hour of crisis. So, no such a day ever occurs in a needy home when the stove is not lit!
Friends, today the farmers of our country are doing wonders in many areas by taking advantage of the new arrangements. Take for example, the farmers of Agartala. These farmers produce very good jackfruit harvest. Anticipating their demand in the country and abroad, this time the jackfruit of farmers of Agartala was brought to Guwahati by rail. These jackfruit are now being sent to London from Guwahati. Similarly, you must have also heard the name of the Shahi Litchi of Bihar. In 2018, the Government also gave GI Tag to Shahi Litchi so that its identity would be reinforced and the farmers would get more benefits. This time the Shahi Litchi of Bihar has also been sent to London by air. From East to West, North to South our country is full of such unique flavors and products. You must definitely have heard about the mangoes of Vizianagaram in South India. Now who wouldn’t like to eat this mango? Therefore, now the Kisan Rail is ferrying hundreds of tons of Vizianagaram mangoes to Delhi. The people of Delhi and North India will get to eat Vizianagaram mangoes, and the farmers of Vizianagaram will earn well. The Kisan Rail has so far transported nearly 2 lakh tonnes of produce. Now the farmers are able to send fruits, vegetables, grains to other remote parts of the country at a very low cost.
My dear countrymen, today on 30th May we are having ‘Mann Ki Baat’ and incidentally it also marks the completion of 7 years of the government. Over these years, the country has followed the mantra of ‘Sabka-Saath, Sabka-Vikas, Sabka-Vishwas’. All of us have worked every moment with dedication in the service of the country. Many friends have sent me letters and said that in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I should also discuss our mutual journey of 7 years. Friends, whatever we have accomplished in these 7 years, it has been of the country, of the countrymen. Together, we have experienced many moments of national pride in these years. When we observe that now India moves ahead not with the thought and pressure of other countries but with her own conviction, then we all feel proud. When we witness that now India gives a befitting reply to those who conspire against us, then our confidence soars. When India does not compromise on the issues of national security, when the strength of our armed forces increases, we feel that yes, we are on the right path.
Friends, I get messages and letters from countless countrymen spanning every corner of the country. Many people are thankful to the country that electricity has reached their village for the first time in 70 years, that their sons and daughters are studying in the light, under the fan. Many people say that our village too is now connected to the city by a paved road. I remember some friends from a tribal area had sent me a message that after the road was built, for the first time they felt that they too had joined the rest of the world. Similarly, someone shares the joy of opening a bank account, someone starts a new employment with the help of different schemes, then they also invite me in sharing that happiness. I keep receiving many invitations from our countrymen for the occasion of ‘GrihPravesh’ – the house warming ceremony, after receiving their home under the ‘Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana’. In these 7 years, I have been associated with a million moments of your happiness. Just a few days ago, a family from a village sent me a photo of the water tap installed in their house under the ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’. They had captioned the photo ‘मेरेगाँवकीजीवनधारा’ – the lifeline of my village, there are many such families! In the 7 decades after independence, only three and a half crore rural homes of our country had water connections. However, just in the last 21 months, four and a half crore houses have been given clean water connections. Of these, 15 months were of the Corona period! A similar confidence has come to the country through the ‘Ayushman Yojana’. When the poor come home healthy with free treatment, they feel that they have got a new life. They feel confident that the country stands by them. With the blessing of such families, the blessings of crores of mothers, our country is moving towards development with strength.
Friends, in these 7 years, India has worked to show the world a new direction in digital transactions. Today, you can make digital payments with absolute ease at any place; it is proving very useful even in this time of Corona. Today, the seriousness and awareness of the countrymen towards cleanliness is increasing. We are also launching record satellites and constructing record roads too. In these 7 years, many old contestations of the country have also been resolved with complete peace and harmony. A new confidence of peace and development has arisen from the northeast to Kashmir. Friends, have you thought all such work which could not be achieved even in decades, how were they done in these 7 years? All this was possible because in these 7 years, more than as the Government or as the people, we worked together as one country. We worked as a team. We worked as Team India. Every citizen has tried to take a few steps forward in advancing the country. Yes! Where there are successes, there are also trials. In these 7 years together, we have overcome many difficult tests as well, and each time we have all emerged stronger. In the form of the Corona pandemic, we are being continuously put to test. This is a crisis that has plagued the whole world, so many people have lost their loved ones. Even big countries were not spared from its devastation. In the midst of this pandemic, India is moving forward with the resolve of ‘सेवा और सहयोग’- ‘service and cooperation’. In the first wave, we fought courageously; this time too India will be victorious in the ongoing fight against the virus. Be it ‘दो गज की दूरी’ social distancing, rules related to masks or vaccines, there should be no letup in our efforts. This indeed is the path to our victory. Next time when we meet in Mann Ki Baat, we will talk about many more inspiring examples of countrymen and discuss new topics. Do continue to keep sending me your suggestions. May all of you stay healthy, keep the country moving forward in this manner. Many many thanks!


78. JUNE 27, 2021
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
Often in Mann Ki Baat there is a volley of your questions. This time I thought of doing something different, asking you questions, so listen carefully to my questions.
Who was the first Indian to win an Individual Gold at the Olympics?
In which game has India won the maximum number of medals at the Olympics?
Which player has won the maximum number of medals at the Olympics?
Friends,
you may or may not send answers to me, but by answering the Olympics quiz that is on MyGov you will win several prizes. Many questions like these are in the Road To Tokyo Quiz on MyGov. Participate in the Road to Tokyo Quiz, know how India has performed earlier, how is our preparation now for Tokyo Olympics, know all this for yourself and tell others too. I want to urge you all to definitely participate in this quiz competition.
Friends,
when we are talking of Tokyo Olympics, how can one forget the legendry athlete Milkha Singh. Some days ago, Corona snatched him away from us. When he was in hospital, I got an opportunity to talk to him. While talking to him I had urged him. I had said that you have represented India in 1964 Tokyo Olympics, so this time when our players are going to Olympics in Tokyo, you have to boost the morale of our athletes, have to motivate them with your message. He was so committed and emotional for sports that he immediately gave his consent even during his illness. But unfortunately, providence had other plans. I still remember he had come to Surat in 2014. We had inaugurated a Night Marathon. The interaction that I had with him then, the chat about sports that happened, that inspired me a lot too. We all know that the entire family of Milkha Singh has been dedicated to sports…. has been adding to the glory of India.
Friends,
when Talent, Dedication, Determination and Sportsman Spirit come together only then a champion is made. In our country most of the sportspersons hail from the smaller towns and villages. Our team that is going to Tokyo too has many such players whose life inspires a lot. When you hear about our Praveen Jadhav ji , then you too will feel… how many difficulties Praveen has gone through to reach here. Praveen hails from a village in Satara district of Maharashtra. He is very good at Archery. His parents run the family by working as labourers and now their son is going to participate in his first Olympics at Tokyo. This is a matter of great pride not only for his parents but for all of us. Similarly, there is one more player, our Neha Goyal ji. Neha is a member of the women’s hockey team going to Tokyo. Her mother and sisters manage the family expenses by working in a cycle factory. Like Neha, Deepika Kumari ji’s life too has been full of ups and downs. Deepika’s father drives an auto rickshaw and her mother is a nurse, and now see, Deepika is at present the only female archer from India in the Tokyo Olympics. Our best wishes are with Deepika, once ranked world’s number one archer.
Friends,
wherever we reach in life, whatever height we attain this connection with the ground, always, keeps us bound to our roots. The joy of success experienced after a period of struggle is something else! Our players going to Tokyo faced scarcity of means and resources in their childhood, but they persevered, and endured with fortitude. The life of Priyanka Goswami ji of Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh also teaches a lot. Priyanka’s father is a bus conductor. As a child, Priyanka adored the bag that the medal winners were presented with. It was this fascination that made her participate in the Race-Walking competition for the first time. Now, she is a big champion of that.
Shivpal Singh ji, who participates in Javelin Throw, hails from Banaras. Shivpalji’s entire family is associated with this sport. His father, uncle and brother are all experts at javelin throw. This family tradition is going to be useful for him in the Tokyo Olympics. The example of Chirag Shetty and his partner SatwikSairaj going for the Tokyo Olympics is also inspiring. Recently, Chirag’s maternal grandfather died of corona. Satwik himself also became corona positive last year. But, despite these hurdles, both of them are preparing to give their best in the Men’s Double Shuttle Competition.
I would like to introduce you to another player, Manish Kaushik ji of Bhiwani, Haryana. Manish ji comes from an agricultural family. While working in the fields in his childhood, Manish became fond of boxing. Today this hobby of his is taking him to Tokyo. There is another player, C.A. Bhavani Devi Her name is Bhavani and she is adroit at fencing. Bhavani, who hails from Chennai, is the first Indian fencer to qualify in the Olympics. I was reading somewhere that in order for Bhavani ji’s training to continue, her mother had even mortgaged her jewellery.
Friends,
there are numerous such names, but in Mann Ki Baat, today I have been able to mention only a few. Every player going to Tokyo has had one’s own share of struggle, and years of toil. They are going not only for themselves but for the country. These players also have to enhance the glory of India and win the hearts of the people and that is why my countrymen I want to advise you too, that we should not pressurize these players knowingly or unknowingly, but support them with an open mind and bolster the enthusiasm of every player.
You can send your wishes to these players with #Cheer4India on social media. If you want to do something more innovative, then definitely do that too. If you come across any idea that the country should do collectively for our players, then you must send it to me. Together we will support our players going to Tokyo – Cheer4India!!! Cheer4India!!! Cheer4India!!
My dear countrymen,
the battle we the countrymen are fighting against corona is continuing…but in this fight, together, we have achieved many an extraordinary milestone! Just a few days ago, our country accomplished an unprecedented feat. On the 21st of June, the next phase of the vaccination campaign commenced…and that very day, the country registered a record of administering vaccines to over 86 lakh people, free of cost…that too on a single day! Such a huge number of free vaccinations by the Government of India; that too in a day. It is but natural that it was widely discussed.
Friends,
a year ago, the question that was confronting all was – When will the vaccine come! Today, in a day, we are administering the Made in India vaccine to lakhs of people, free of cost…and this indeed is the strength of New India.
Friends,
we have to keep making efforts to ensure that every citizen is able to avail of safety through the vaccine. At many places, in order to end vaccine hesitancy, myriad organizations and members of civil society have come forward…and together, they are doing a wonderful job… Come…let us too visit a village and speak to people about the vaccine…let’s go to village Dulariya, district Betul, Madhya Pradesh.
PM – Hello…
Rajesh – Namaskar.
PM – Namaste ji.
Rajesh –My name is Rajesh Hiraawe, Gram Panchayat Dulariya, Bhimpur Block.
PM – Rajesh ji, I called up since I wanted to know about the Corona situation in your village, as of now.
Rajesh – Sir…the Corona situation here…well, there’s nothing of that sort here!
PM – People are not ailing now…?
Rajesh – Ji
PM – What is the population of the village? How many people are there?
Rajesh – Sir, there are 462 men and 332 women in the village.
PM – Fine Rajesh ji, have you taken the vaccine?
Rajesh – No Sir, not yet…
PM – O…why not?
Rajesh – Sir, some people here created such a delusion on WhatsApp that many were misled Sir.
PM – So…even you bear a fear in your mind!
Rajesh – Yes sir…the entire village was being misled.
PM – Oh…what have you said? See Rajesh ji…
Rajesh – Ji
PM – I would like to urge you and all my brothers and sisters in the village to dispel fear, if any…
Rajesh – Ji
PM – In our country, over 31 crore people have got themselves vaccinated.
Rajesh – Ji
PM – You know very well…I’ve myself been vaccinated with both doses.
Rajesh – Ji Sir
PM – And my mother is close to a hundred years of age…she too has taken both doses! At times, some people develop fever on account of this…but it’s very minor; just for a few hours…See, not getting vaccinated can prove dangerous.
Rajesh – Ji
PM – That way, you expose yourself to risk; not just that, you can endanger the family as well as the village!
Rajesh – Ji
PM -And Rajesh ji, that is why, as soon as possible, get yourself vaccinated…and in the village, tell everyone that the vaccine is being administered by the Government of India, free of cost…and for all persons above 18 years of age, this vaccination is free.
Rajesh – Ji Ji
PM – So, do tell this to people in the village…and this is not at all a reason for an atmosphere of fear in the village!
Rajesh – Sir, the reason is – some of them have spread such a misleading rumour…that deeply scared people. For example, developing fever after taking the vaccine…the fever leading to other ailments…rumour has been spread to the extent that it leads to a person’s death!
PM – Alas!…. These days, there is so much of radio and television; so much of news…hence it becomes easy for making people understand. And let me tell you…there are many villages in India where people have availed of the vaccine…I mean, cent percent of them. I’ll give you one such example…
Rajesh – Ji
PM – There’s district Bandipora in Kashmir…in this district, people of village Weyan together set themselves a target of 100% vaccines…and also achieved it. Today, in this village in Kashmir, all persons above the age of 18 have taken the vaccine. I came to know about three villages in Nagaland also where people have been vaccinated a 100 percent.
Rajesh – Ji Ji
PM – Rajesh ji, you too should communicate this across your village and neighbouring villages…and the way you also put it – it is a fallacy…just something misleading.
Rajesh – Ji Ji
PM – So, the only way to address this fallacy is convincing others by getting yourself vaccinated. You will do that, won’t you?
Rajesh – Ji Sir.
PM – Will you do it for sure?
Rajesh – Ji Sir, Ji Sir. Talking to you made me feel that I should get myself vaccinated and mobilise others to get the same done.
PM – Okay. Is there anyone else in the village I could talk to?
Rajesh – Yes Sir…there is.
PM – Who will speak?
Kishorilal – Hello Sir, Namaskar.
PM – Namaste ji, who is speaking?
Kishorilal – Sir, my name is KishorilalDurve.
PM – So Kishorilal ji, we were just speaking to Rajesh ji.
Kishorilal – Ji Sir.
PM – And he was lamenting that people indulge in a lot of loose talk around the vaccine.
Kishorilal – Ji
PM – Have you too heard something like that?
Kishorilal – Yes…I have heard such things Sir.
PM – What have you heard?
Kishorilal – Since Sir, Maharashtra is close by, some relatives staying there spread rumours that people are dying because of the vaccine…some are getting sick…people are full of misconceptions, that is why they are not taking it Sir.
PM – No…what do they say? “Now Corona is over” – is that what they say?
Kishorilal-Ji
PM – Do they say that nothing happens due to Corona?
Kishorilal – No Sir…they don’t say that corona is gone. They say Corona is there, but that people who take vaccines are getting sick…all are dying. That is the situation they describe.
PM – Okay…meaning people are dying BECAUSE of the vaccine?
Kishorilal – Ours is a tribal area Sir…as it is, people get scared quickly…which leads to spreading of mistaken notions…that’s why people are not taking the vaccine Sir.
PM – See Kishorilal ji…
Kishorilal – Yes Sir
PM – Those spreading rumours will keep on doing so.
Kishorilal ji – Ji
PM – We have to save lives…we have to save our village…and our countrymen. If someone says Corona is gone, do not be under this mistaken notion.
Kishorilal – Ji
PM – This ailment is like a master of disguise.
Kishorilal – Ji sir
PM – It keeps changing its looks…surfaces in myriad new forms and colours.
Kishorilal – Ji
PM – And to protect ourselves from it, we have two ways. One is adhering to the protocol for Corona – wearing a mask, frequently washing hands with soap, maintaining distancing…and the other way is …along with all this, getting vaccinated…that too is a good safety shield…think about that.
Kishorilal – Ji.
Prime Minister- Ok Kishorilal ji tell us one thing
Kishorilal -Ji sir.
Prime Minister- When people talk to you, how do you communicate it to them? You try to convince people or do you get carried away by rumours?
Kishorilal- What to convince.., when there are people in large numbers, we too are overtaken by fear sir.
Prime Minister- Look Kishorilal ji, I have spoken to you, today you are my friend.
Kishorilal – Ji Sir.
Prime Minister-You don’t have to be afraid and have to remove fear from people too. Will you?
Kishorilal- Ji Sir. Will dispel that Sir, will remove fear from people too sir. I myself will get it done.
Prime Minister- Look, don’t at all pay attention to rumours.
Kishorilal- Ji.
Prime Minister- You know, how much hard work our scientists have put in to make this vaccine.
Kishorilal ji- Ji sir.
Prime Minister- Through the year many senior scientists have worked and that is why we have to believe in science, believe in scientists. And should explain to these propagators of falsehood that look brothers it is not so, so many people have taken vaccine, nothing untoward happens.
Kishorilal- Ji
Prime Minister- And we should keep ourselves very safe from rumours, save villages too.
Kishorilal- Ji
Prime Minister- And Rajesh ji, Kishorilal ji, to friends like you I would urge that work to stop these rumours not only in your village but in other villages too. And tell people that you interacted with me.
Kishorilal- Ji Sir.
Prime Minister- Tell them…tell them my name.
Kishorilal- Will tell sir and will explain to people and will have it ourselves too.
Prime Minister- See, convey my best wishes to your entire village.
Kishorilal- Ji Sir.
Prime Minister- And tell everyone that whenever their turn comes…
Kishorilal – Ji…
Prime Minister- Definitely get vaccinated.
Kishorilal- Definitely Sir.
Prime Minister- I would like that to the women of village, to our mothers and sisters…
Kishorilal- Ji sir
Prime Minister- Involve them more and more in this work and keep them actively associated with yourself.
Kishorilal- Ji.
Prime Minister- At times when mothers- sisters tell a thing people agree readily.
Kishorilal- Ji
Prime Minister- Will you update me when vaccination gets completed in your village?
Kishorilal- Yes, will tell sir.
Prime Minister- Sure, will you tell me?
Kishorilal- Ji
Prime Minister- Look, I will wait for your letter.
Kishorilal- Ji Sir.
Prime Minister- Ok, Rajesh ji, Kishore ji many many thanks. Got an opportunity to talk to you.
Kishorilal- Thanks Sir, you spoke to us. Many many thanks to you too.
Friends,
someday this will be a subject of case study for the world that how during this Corona period people of villages of India, our forest dwellers-tribal brothers-sisters, displayed their capabilities and understanding. People of villages set up quarantine centres, made Covid protocol as per local requirements. People of villages did not let anybody sleep hungry, did not let work in fields stop either. The villages also ensured daily supply of milk and vegetables to nearby cities that is, they took care of themselves and of others too. We have to keep doing the same way in the vaccination campaign too. We have to be aware and make others aware too. Every person in the village gets vaccinated – this should be the goal for all villages. Remember, and I specially want to tell you… Ask a question to yourself- everyone wants to be successful but what is the deciding mantra for success? The decisive mantra for success is continuity, so we don’t have to get lax, don’t have to get in delusion. We have to keep making efforts continuously…register victory over Corona.
My dear countrymen,
now the monsoon season has also arrived in our country. When the clouds rain, they rain not only for us, but also for the generations to come! Rain water also collects in the ground, it also replenishes the water level of the ground. And that’s why I consider water conservation as a form of service to the country. You too must have seen, many of us are taking this pious work as their responsibility. One such person is Satchidanand Bharti ji of Pauri Garhwal, Uttarakhand. Bharti ji is a teacher and he has imparted very good education to the people through his deeds. Today, due to his hard work, the huge water crisis in the Ufrainkhal area of ​​Pauri Garhwal has come to an end. Where people used to pine for water, today there is continuous supply of water throughout the year.
Friends,
in the hills there exists a traditional method of water conservation, which is called Chalkhal. That is, it involves digging a big pit to collect water. Bharti ji also added some new methods to this tradition. He regularly got small and big ponds dug. Due to this, not only the hills of Ufrainkhal turned green, but the problem of drinking water of the people was also solved. You will be surprised to know that Bharti ji has got more than 30 thousand such water tanks constructed. 30 thousand! This monumental work of his continues even today and is inspiring many people
Friends,
similarly the people of Andhav village in Banda district of UP have also made an innovative effort and have given a very interesting name to their campaign – ‘Khet ka pani khet mein, gaon ka panigaonmein’. Under this campaign, high bunds have been raised in several hundred bighas of fields of the village. As a result rain water started collecting in the field, and started percolating into the ground. Now, these people are also planning to plant trees on the bunds of the fields. That is, now farmers will get all three – water, trees and money! As it is the village is getting recognized far and wide due to its good work.
Friends,
taking inspiration from all of these efforts, we can also conserve water around us, in whatever way possible… we should save it. We must not to miss this crucial period of the monsoon season.
My dear countrymen,
it is said in our scriptures –
““नास्तिमूलम्अनौषधम्” ” “Nasti Moolam Anoushadham”
That is, there is no such plant on earth which does not have any medicinal properties! There are many such trees and plants around us, which have amazing properties, but many times we do not even know about them! Bhai Paritosh, a friend from Nainital has also sent me a letter on the same subject. He has written that he came to know about miraculous medicinal properties of Giloy and many other plants only after the outbreak of Corona! Paritosh has also urged me to tell all the listeners of Mann Ki Baat that we should know about the flora around us, and also convey to others. In fact, this is our centuries old heritage, which we have to preserve. In this direction, Mr. Ramlotan Kushwaha ji, a friend from Satna of Madhya Pradesh, has done a very commendable job. Ramlotan ji has built a museum of indigenous plantson his farm. In this museum, he has collected hundreds of medicinal plants and seeds. And he has brought them here from far flung regions. Apart from this, he also grows many types of Indian vegetables every year. People visit this garden, this museum of Ramlotan ji, and learn a lot from it. Indeed, this is a very good experiment which can be replicated in different regions of the country. I would like that those of you who can make such an effort, should attempt it. This can also open up new sources of income for you. Another benefit will be that the identity of your area will gain wide prominence through the local medicinal plants.
My dear countrymen,
a few days from now we will celebrate National Doctors Day on the 1st of July. This day is dedicated to the birth anniversary of the great doctor and statesman of the country, Dr B.C. Roy. We are all grateful for the contribution of doctors in the Corona period. Our doctors have served us without caring about their lives. Therefore, this time around National Doctors Day becomes all the more special.
Friends,
Hippocrates, one of the most respected persons in the world of medicine, had said:
“Wherever the art of Medicine is loved, there is also a love of Humanity.”
Doctors are able to serve us with the power of this very love. Therefore, it is our duty to thank them with an equal measure of affection and encourage them! By the way, there are many people in our country who have come forward and worked to help the doctors. I came to know about one such attempt from Srinagar. Here a Boat Ambulance Service was started at Dal Lake. This service was started by Tariq Ahmad Patloo ji of Srinagar, who is a Houseboat Owner. He himself has also fought the battle with COVID-19 and this inspired him to start the Ambulance Service. A campaign is also underway to make people aware of this ambulance, and continuous announcements from the ambulance are being made by him. The effort is that people should wear a mask and undertake other necessary precautions too.
Friends,
along with Doctors Day, Chartered Accountants Day is also celebrated on the 1st of July. A few years ago, I had asked for global level Indian audit firms as a gift from Chartered Accountants of the country. Today I want to remind them of that. Chartered Accountants can play a very worthy and positive role in bringing transparency to the economy. I extend my best wishes to all Chartered Accountants and their family members
My dear countrymen,
there is one great feature of India’s fight against Corona. Each and every person of the country has played their part in this fight. I have often spoken about this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. But some people also complain that not a lot is discussed about them. Many people, whether they are bank staff, teachers, small traders or shopkeepers, people working in shops, street vendors, security watchmen, postmen and post office employees… Actually, this list is very long and everyone has played his or her part. Innumerable people have been involved with government and administration at different levels.
Friends,
you have probably heard the name of Guru Prasad Mohapatra ji, who was the Secretary to the Government of India. Today in “Mann Ki Baat”, I want to speak about him too. Guruprasad ji was diagnosed with Corona, he was admitted in the hospital and yet at the same time was performing his official duties too. He toiled day and night to increase the Oxygen producing capacities of the country and to ensure that Oxygen reached far flung areas. On the one hand, the affairs of the court, the pressure of the media, he kept fighting on many fronts simultaneously and did not stop working during his illness. Even after being told not to, he used to insist on joining the video conferences on oxygen. Such was his concern for his countrymen. He kept on making arrangements to deliver oxygen to the people of the country, regardless of himself being on the hospital bed. It is sad for all of us that the country has also lost this KarmaYogi ; Corona has snatched him away from us. There are countless people who have never been discussed. Our tribute to every such person would be that we follow the covid protocol fully, get our vaccinations done.
My dear countrymen,
the best thing about ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is that you all contribute to it more than me. I saw a post on MyGov by Thiru R.Guruprasad ji from Chennai. You too will be pleased to know what he has written. He has written that he is a regular listener of the program “Mann Ki Baat”. I am quoting a few lines from Guruprasad ji’s post. He has written –
“Whenever you talk about Tamil Nadu, my interest increases even more.
You have discussed the greatness of Tamil language and Tamil culture, Tamil festivals and major places in Tamil Nadu.”
Guru Prasad ji further writes – “In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, you have also spoken many times about the achievements of the people of Tamil Nadu. What to say about your love for Thirukkural and your respect for Thiruvalluvar ji! That’s why I have prepared an E-Book by compiling all that you have spoken about Tamil Nadu in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Will you say something about this e-book and also release it on the Namo App? Thanks!”
‘I was reading the letter of Guruprasad ji for you.’
Guruprasad ji, I am very happy to read this post of yours. Now, add another page to your E-Book –
नान तमिलकला चाराक्तिन पेरिये अभिमानी |
नान उलगतलये पलमायां तमिल मोलियन पेरिये अभिमानी |
There could definitely be fault in pronunciation but my efforts and my love will never diminish. I want to tell those who are not Tamil speaking, what I have told Guruprasad ji –
‘I am a big admirer of Tamil culture.
I am a big admirer of Tamil, the oldest language in the world.’
Friends,
every Indian should cherish and feel proud that the most ancient language of the world belongs to our country. I take a lot of pride in Tamil. Guru Prasad ji, this effort of yours is going to give a new vision to me. When I do ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I put forth my point in a simple manner. I didn’t know that this was even a part, an element of it. When you collected all our old conversations, I read it not once but twice. Guruprasad ji, I will definitely get this book of yours uploaded on the Namo App. Best wishes to you for future endeavours.
My dear countrymen, today we talked about the difficulties and precautions pertaining to Corona and also discussed many achievements of the country and countrymen. Now another big opportunity is in front of us too. 15th August is also approaching. Amrit Mahotsav of 75 years of Independence is a big inspiration for us. Let us learn to live for the country. The Struggle for Independence is the story of those who died for the country, we have to make this post-Independence time the story of those who live for the country. Our mantra should be – India First. Every decision of ours, every decision should have the basis – India First!
Friends,
the country has also set many collective goals in the Amrit Mahotsav. Like, we have to revive the history related to our freedom fighters by remembering them. You will remember that in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I appealed to the youth to research and write history of the freedom struggle. The motive was that young talents should come forward, young thinking, young thoughts should gain prominence, the young pen should write with new energy. I feel very happy to see that in a very short time more than two and a half thousand youth have come forward to do this work. Friends, the interesting thing is that the Struggle of the 19th – 20th century is usually talked about, but it is a matter of joy that the youth who have been born and brought up in the 21st century have taken up cudgels to bring to the forefront the history of the Freedom Struggle of 19th and 20th century. All these people have sent the full details on MyGov. These people will be writing on the freedom struggle in different languages of the country,such as Hindi – English, Tamil, Kannada, Bengali, Telugu, Marathi – Malayalam, Gujarati. Some are associated with the freedom struggle, gathering information about the places around them, while someone else is writing a book on tribal freedom fighters.This is a good start. I request all of you to join the Amrit Mahotsav, in whichever way you can. It is our good fortune that we are witness to the festival of 75 years of our Independence. Hence the next time we meet in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we will talk more about preparations for the Amrit Mahotsav. May all of you stay healthy, move forward following the rules related to Corona and keep giving momentum to the country with your new efforts. With best wishes, thank you very much!


79. JULY 25, 2021
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. A few amazing pictures taken a couple of days ago, some memorable moments are still there in front of my eyes. Let us hence commence Mann Ki Baat this time, with those very moments. At the Tokyo Olympics, watching Indian sportspersons march carrying the Tricolour exhilarated not just me but the entire country…as if the whole country unitedly exhorted her warriors saying, “Vijayi Bhava – emerge victorious!” When these sportspersons had departed from India, I had the opportunity of chatting with them, knowing about them and conveying it to the country. These sportspersons have reached where they are after overcoming numerous hurdles in life. Today, they possess the strength of your love and support – that’s why, come…let us together extend our good wishes to all of them; encourage them. On social media, our Victory Punch Campaign for the support of Olympics sportspersons has begun. Do share your Victory Punch with your team…Cheer for India.
Friends, it is but natural to get emotional in honour of the one who bears the Tricolour in honour of the country. This feeling of patriotism unites all of us. Tomorrow, that is the 26th of July is Kargil Vijay Diwas as well. The Kargil war is one symbol of the bravery and patience on part of India’s Armed Forces which the whole world has watched. This time this pride filled day will be celebrated amid Amrit Mahotsav. That is why this day becomes all the more special. I wish you read the enthralling saga of Kargil…let us all bow to the bravehearts of Kargil.
Friends, this time on the 15th of August, the country is entering her 75th year of Independence. We are indeed very fortunate that we are witnessing 75 years of Freedom; a freedom that the country waited for, for centuries. You may remember, to commemorate 75 years of Freedom, Amrit Mahotsav had commenced on the 12th of March from Bapu’s Sabarmati Ashram. On this very day, Bapu’s Dandi Yatra too was revived…since then, from Jammu-Kashmir to Puduchery; from Gujarat to the Northeast, programmes in connection with Amrit Mahotsav are being held across the country. There are many such incidents, such freedom fighters whose contribution have been huge, but had not been adequately discussed…today, people are able to know about them. Now, take Moirang Day, for instance…the tiny town of Moirang in Manipur was once a major base of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose’s Indian National Army, INA. Here, even before Independence, Col Shaukat Malik ji of INA had unfurled the Flag. During Amrit Mahotsav, on the 14th of April, the Tricolour was once again hoisted at that very Moirang. Innumerable such freedom fighters and great men are being remembered by the country during Amrit Mahotsav.Programmes in that connection are being successively organized by the government and social organisations. A similar event is about to take place on the 15th of August this time…this is an endeavour connected with the National Anthem. It’s an effort on part of the Ministry of Culture to have maximum number of Indians sing the National Anthem together. For this, a website too has been created – Rashtragan.in. With the help of this website, you can render the National Anthem and record it, thereby getting connected with the campaign. I hope you connect yourselves with this novel initiative. In the days to come, you will get to see many such campaigns and efforts. Amrit Mahotsav is not a programme of any government; neither a programme of any political party…it is a programme of crores and crores of Indians…a bow to our freedom fighters by every independent and grateful Indian. And the extension of the basic sentiment behind this festival is immense…the spirit entails treading the path of our freedom fighters…building a country of their dreams. Just the way champion proponents of Freedom had joined hands for the cause, we have to come together for the development of the country. We have to live for the country, work for the country…and in that, even the smallest of efforts too produce big results. We can contribute to nation building even while performing our routine chores…such as ‘Vocal for Local’. Supporting local entrepreneurs, artists, craftsmen, weavers should come naturally to us. The National Handloom Day on the 7th of August is an occasion when we can strive to attempt that. National Handloom Day has a remarkable historic background. On this very day in 1905, the Swadeshi Andolan had begun.
Friends, in the rural and tribal regions of our country, handloom is a major source of income. This is a sector that comprises lakhs of women, weavers and craftsmen. Even small efforts on your part will give rise to a new hope in weavers. Do purchase something or the other and share your thought with others as well…now that we are celebrating 75 years of Independence, it of course becomes our responsibility. You must have noticed that year 2014 onwards, we often touch upon Khadi in Mann ki Baat. It is only on account of your efforts that today, the sale of Khadi has risen manifold. Could anyone even think that in any Khadi store, the sales figure would cross one crore rupees…But you have made that possible too. Whenever, wherever you purchase a Khadi product, it does benefit our poor weaver brothers and sisters. That is why, in a way, buying Khadi is service to people, service to the country. I urge you my dear brothers and sisters, to make it a point to definitely buy Handloom products being made in rural areas and share it on #MyHandloomMyPride.
Friends, when one refers to the freedom movement and Khadi, remembering revered Bapu is but natural. Just the way the Quit India Movement, Bharat Chhoro Andolan steered under Bapu’s leadership, every countryman today has to lead a Bharat Jodo Andolan. It is our duty to ensure that our work helps closely knit, bind our India which is filled with diversity. Come, on Amrit Mahotsav, let us make a sacred Amrit resolve that the country remains to be our highest faith; our topmost priority. We have to move forward with the mantra ‘Nation First, Always First’.
My dear countrymen, today I wish to express my special thanks to my young friends tuned in to Mann ki Baat. Just a few days ago, on part of MyGov, a study was conducted regarding the listeners of Mann ki Baat. In this study, primarily, people who send messages and suggestions were focused upon. The study revealed the fact that out of those sending messages and suggestions, close to 75% are below the age of 35…meaning thereby that the suggestions of the youth power of India are steering Mann ki Baat. I view this as a very good indicator. Mann Ki Baat is a medium which has positivity, sensitivity. In Mann Ki Baat, we talk about positive things; its character is collective.
This activism for positive thoughts and suggestions in the youth delights me. I am happy also about the opportunity that I get through ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to know of the minds of the youth.
Friends, suggestions received from you are the real strength of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. It is your suggestions, through ‘Mann Ki Baat’, that express the diversity of India, spread the fragrance of service and sacrifice of Indians in all the four directions, inspire one and all through the innovation of our toiling youth. You send ideas of various kinds in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. We are not able to discuss all of them, but I do send many of them to related departments so that further work can be done on them.
Friends, I want to tell you about the efforts of Saayee Praneeth ji. Saayee Praneeth ji is a Software Engineer, hailing from Andhra Paradesh. Last year he saw that in his area farmers had to suffer a lot due to the vagaries of weather. For years he had interest in meteorology. So, he decided to use his interest and talent for the welfare of farmers. Now he purchases weather data from different data sources, analyses them and sends necessary information through various media to farmers in local language. Besides weather updates, Praneeth ji also gives guidance to people about what they should do in different climatic conditions… Especially how to be safe from floods or how to avoid storm or lightning, he talks about this too.
Friends, on the one hand this effort of a young software engineer touches our hearts; on the other the use of technology by one of our friends will amaze us. This friend Shriman Isaak Munda ji hails from a village in Sambalpur district of Odisha. Isaak ji once used to work as a daily wager but now he has become an internet sensation. He is earning a lot through his YouTube Channel. In his videos he shows prominently the local dishes, traditional ways of cooking, his village, his lifestyle, family and food habits. His journey as a YouTuber began in March 2020 when he posted a video related to Pakhal, the famous local dish of Odisha. Since then, he has posted hundreds of videos. This effort of his is different for many reasons. Specially because through this, people living in cities get a chance to watch the lifestyle about which they don’t know much. Isaak Munda ji is celebrating by blending culture and cuisine equally and inspiring us too.
Friends, while we are discussing technology I want to discuss of an interesting subject. Recently you must have read, seen that a start-up established by an alumni of IIT Madras has made a 3D printed house. The construction of the house through 3D printing, how did this happen after all? Actually, this start-up first of all fed a 3 Dimensional design in a 3 D printer and then through a concrete of a special kind fabricated a 3 D structure layer by layer. You will be happy to know that many experiments of this kind are being done throughout the country. There was a time when it would take years to complete even a minor construction. But today due to technology the situation is changing in India. Some time ago we had launched a Global Housing Technology Challenge to invite such innovative companies from all over the world. This is a unique attempt of its kind in the country; hence we gave it the name Light House Projects. For now, work on Light House Projects is on at a fast pace at 6 different locations in the country. Modern technology and innovative methods are used in these Light House Projects. This reduces the duration of construction. Along with that, the houses that are constructed are more durable, economical and comfortable. Recently, through drones, I also reviewed these projects and saw live their work progress.
In the project at Indore, Pre-Fabricated Sandwich Panel System is being used in place of Brick-and-Mortar Walls. In Rajkot, the Light House is being made with French Technology in which through a tunnel Monolithic Concrete construction technology is being used. Houses made with this technology will be lot more capable of withstanding disasters. In Chennai, the Pre-cast Concrete system technologies form America and Finland are being used. By this, houses will get built faster and the cost too will be low. In Ranchi houses will be built using the 3D Construction System of Germany. In this, every room will be constructed separately and then the entire structure will be joined together the way block toys are joined. In Agartala, using technology from New Zealand, houses that can withstand major earthquakes are being made with steel frame. Meanwhile, in Lucknow technology from Canada is being used. In this plaster and paint will not be required and walls prepared in advance will be used to build houses faster.
Friends, today an attempt is being made in the country to ensure that these projects work as Incubation centers. Through this our planners, Architects, Engineers and students will know of new technology and experiment with them too. I am sharing these things especially with our youth so that in the interest of the nation they are encouraged towards technology in newer fields.
My dear countrymen, you must have heard of an English adage- “To learn is to grow” that is to learn is to progress. When we learn something new, doors to new advances open up automatically for us. Whenever effort to do something new, different from the rut, has been made, new doors have opened for humankind, a new era has begun. And you must have seen whenever something new happens anywhere, its result surprises everyone. Now, for example, if I ask you which the states that you would connect with Apples are? Obviously in your mind first of all the name of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu-Kashmir and Uttarakhand would strike. But if I ask you to add the name of Manipur too to this list you will probably be filled with surprise. Youths filled with passion to do something new have demonstrated this feat in Manipur. Nowadays apple farming is picking up fast in the Ukhrul district of Manipur. Farmers here are growing apples in their orchards. To learn apple farming these people have taken formal training by going to Himachal. One of these is T S Ringphami Young. By profession he is an aeronautical engineer. He along with his wife Shrimati T S Angel has grown apples. Similarly, Avungshee Shimre Augasteena too has grown apples in her orchard. Avungshee had a job in Delhi. She returned to her village quitting this and started farming apple. There are many such apple growers in Manipur who have demonstrated something different and something new.
Friends, in our tribal communities, Ber fruit has always been very popular. The members of the tribal community have always been cultivating Ber. But its cultivation is increasing especially after the COVID-19 pandemic. Bikramjit Chakma of 32 years of age is my young friend from Unakoti, Tripura. He has not only earned a lot of profit by starting the Ber cultivation; Now he is also motivating people to do Ber cultivation. The state government has also come forward to help such people. Many special nurseries have been started by the government for this purpose so that the demand of the people associated with the cultivation of Ber can be met. Innovation is happening in agriculture, so creativity is also being witnessed in the by-products of agriculture.
Friends, I have also come to know about an attempt made in LakhimpurKheri in Uttar Pradesh. A unique initiative has taken place in LakhimpurKheri during the period of COVID itself. Here, the work of training women to manufacture fibre from the waste banana stems was started. The way to make the best out of the waste. Banana fibre is prepared by cutting the stem of a banana with the help of a machine, the fibre is like jute or flax. Handbags, mats, rugs, many things are made from this fibre. Through this, the utilization of crop waste started, on the other hand our sisters and daughters living in the village acquired another source of income. Through this work of Banana fibre, a woman from the area earns four to six hundred rupees per day. Banana is cultivated on hundreds of acres of land in Lakhimpur Kheri. After the harvesting of banana, the farmers usually had to spend a separate sum to dispose of its stem. Now not only their money is being saved; and lending credence to the saying of ‘Getting two of something, for the price of one!’
Friends, on the one hand products are being manufactured from banana fibre; on the other, delicious dishes like dosa and gulabjamun are also being made from banana flour. Women in Uttara Kannada and Dakshina Kannada districts of Karnataka are doing this unique work. This endeavour also began in the Corona period itself. These women not only prepared things like dosa, gulabjamun from banana flour; they also shared their pictures on social media. When more people came to know about the banana flour, its demand also increased and so did the income of these women. Like Lakhimpur Kheri, here too, women are leading this innovative idea.
Friends, such examples become the inspiration to do something new in life. There must be many such people around you too. When your family is involved in close conversations, you should also make these a part of your chat. Take out some time and go to see such efforts with children and if you get the opportunity, do something like this yourself. And yes, I would like it if you share all this with me on Namo App or MyGov.
My dear countrymen, there is a verse in our Sanskrit texts –
आत्मार्थम् जीव लोके अस्मिन्, को न जीवति मानवः |
परम् परोपकारार्थम्, यो जीवति स जीवति ||
Atmantharmjeevalokeasmin, ko na jeevtimanavah.
Paramparopkarathram, yojeevatisajeevati ||
That is, everyone in this world lives for himself. But in actuality only the person who exists for the sake of others really lives. Talking about the philanthropic efforts of the sons and daughters of Mother India is what ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is all about. Today also, we’ll talk about some of these friends. One of our friends hails from Chandigarh city. I too, have lived in Chandigarh for a few years. It is a very cheerful and beautiful city. The people of Chandigarh are also large hearted and yes, if you are a foodie, you will have more fun here. In Sector 29 of Chandigarh, Sanjay Rana ji runs a food stall and sells Chole-Bhature on his cycle. One day his daughter Riddhima and niece Riya came to him with an idea. Both requested him to feed chole-bhature for free to those who had got the COVID Vaccine. He happily agreed to the suggestion and immediately started this good and noble effort. To eat Sanjay Rana ji’schole-bhature for free, you have to show that you have got the vaccine administered on the very day. As soon as you show the vaccination message he will give you delicious Chole-Bhature. It is said that for the welfare of the society, spirit of service and duty are required more than money. Our Sanjay Bhai is proving this saying to be right.
Friends, I would like to discuss another such work today. This effort is being attempted in Nilgiri of Tamil Nadu. Here Radhika Shastriji has started the AmbuRx (Amburex) Project. The purpose of this project is to provide easy transport for the treatment of patients in hilly areas. Radhika runs a cafe in Coonoor. She raised funds for AmbuRx from her cafe colleagues. Today six AmbuRx are serving in the Nilgiri hills and are coming to the aid of patients in remote parts during the time of emergency. An AmbuRx is equipped with a Stretcher, Oxygen Cylinder, First Aid Box and other things
Friends, whether it is Sanjay ji or Radhika ji, their examples demonstrate that we can render service while doing our routine work, our business or job.
Friends, a few days back a very interesting and very emotional event occurred, which imparted new strength to India-Georgia friendship. In this ceremony, India handed over the Holy Relic or icon of Saint Queen Ketevan to the Government of Georgia and the people there, for this mission our Foreign Minister himself went there. The ceremony, which took place in a very emotionally charged atmosphere, was attended by the President of Georgia, the Prime Minister, many religious leaders, and a large number of Georgians. The words that were said in praise of India in this ceremony are indeed very memorable. This single ceremony has not only strengthened the relations between the two nations but as well as between Goa and Georgia. This is because these holy relics of Saint Queen Ketevan were found in 2005 from Saint Augustine Church in Goa.
Friends, the question arising in your mind must be…what is this matter all about and when and how did this happen? Actually, this is an incident about four to five hundred years ago. Queen Ketevan was the daughter of the royal family of Georgia. In 1624 after ten years of imprisonment she was martyred. According to an ancient Portuguese document, the mortal remains of Saint Queen Ketevan were kept in the Saint Augustine Convent of Old Goa. But, for a long time it was believed that her remains buried in Goa were lost in the earthquake of 1930.
After decades of tireless efforts by the Indian government and Georgia’s historians, researchers, archaeologists and the Georgian Church, the relics were successfully discovered in 2005. This is an extremely emotional topic for the people of Georgia. That is why keeping in mind their historical, religious and spiritual sentiments, the Government of India decided to gift a part of these relics to the people of Georgia. Today, I would like to thank the people of Goa for preserving this unique side of the shared history of India and Georgia. Goa has been the land of many a great spiritual heritage. Saint Augustine Church is a UNESCO’s World Heritage Site – a part of the Churches and Convents of Goa.
My dear countrymen, let me now take you straight from Georgia to Singapore, where another glorious opportunity arose earlier this month. The Prime Minister of Singapore and my friend, Lee Hsien Loong inaugurated the recently renovated Silat Road Gurudwara. He also wore the traditional Sikh turban. This Gurudwara was built about a hundred years ago and there is also a memorial dedicated to Bhai Maharaj Singh. Bhai Maharaj Singh ji fought for the independence of India and this moment becomes more inspiring when we are celebrating 75 years of independence. The people to people strength between two countries gets a boost with such initiatives and efforts. These also show how important it is to live in a harmonious environment and understand each other’s culture.
My dear countrymen, today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we have discussed many topics. There is another subject which is very close to my heart. It is the topic of water conservation. The place where I spent my childhood, there was always shortage of water. We used to yearn for rain and thus saving every drop of water has been a part of our traditions, our sanskar. Now this mantra of “Water conservation through public participation” has changed the picture there. Saving every drop of water, preventing any kind of wastage of water… it should become a natural part of our lifestyle. Such a tradition should be made in our families, which would make every member proud.
Friends, the protection of nature and environment is embedded in the cultural life of India, in our daily lives. At the same time, rains and the monsoon have always shaped our thoughts, our philosophy and our civilization. In ‘Ritusanhar’ and ‘Meghdoot’, the great poet Kalidas has beautifully described the rains. These poems are still very popular among literature lovers.The magnificence of rains is also beautifully described in the Parjanya Suktam of Rigveda. Similarly, the relationship between the earth, the sun and the rain has been elaborated in a poetic form in the Srimad Bhagavata.
अष्टौ मासान् निपीतं यद्, भूम्याः च, ओद-मयम् वसु |
स्वगोभिः मोक्तुम् आरेभे, पर्जन्यः काल आगते ||
That is, the Sun has exploited the earth’s wealth in the form of water for eight months, now in the monsoon season, the Sun is returning this accumulated wealth to the earth. Indeed, the monsoon and rainy season is not only beautiful and pleasant, but it is also nurturing, life-giving. The rain water that we are getting is for our future generations, we should never forget that.
Today a thought came to my mind that why not end my talk with such interesting references. My very best wishes to all of you for the forthcoming festivals. At the time of festivals and celebrations, you must remember that Corona has not yet gone from amongst us. You must not forget the protocols related to Corona. May all of you be healthy and happy.
Many many thanks!


80. AUGUST 29, 2021
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
All of us know that today is the birth anniversary of Major Dhyanchand ji. And our country celebrates it as National Sports Day, in commemoration. A thought struck me, that perhaps, wherever Major Dhyanchand ji’s soul must be at the moment, it must be feeling overjoyed…since it was Dhyanchand ji’s hockey that brought glory to Indian hockey in the whole world. And four decades later, almost after 41 years, the youth of India, her sons and daughters, once again infused vitality in our hockey. And irrespective of the number of medals won, no citizen of India enjoys victory until a medal is won in hockey. And this time, in the Olympics, the medal that was won for hockey came our way after four decades. You can imagine…wherever Major Dhyanchand ji might be…his heart, his soul must be overflowing with joy. And the entire life of Dhyanchand ji was dedicated to Sports…and that is why today, when the youth of the country, our sons and daughters are visibly drawn towards sports, with even parents experiencing happiness on children coming forward in sports; this eagerness that one can see all over…I feel that itself is a great tribute to Major Dhyanchand ji.
Friends,
whenever the subject of Sports and Games is touched upon, the entire young generation comes into view; naturally so. And when we cast a keen glance at the young generation, we notice a sweeping change there. The mind of the youth has undergone a transformation. And today’s young minds, shunning obsolete, age old methods and patterns, want to do something new altogether; something different. Today’s young mind does not want to tread ready made beaten paths; it wants to carve out newer paths. It wants to step on unknown territory. New destinations, new goals as well, new roads, new aspirations as well! And once a young person decides in the mind, no stone is left unturned in the pursuit…persevering day and night. We see how, some time ago, when India opened her Space Sector…within no time the young generation lapped up the opportunity. And to avail of its benefits, college students and young people working in Universities and the private sector enthusiastically came forward. And I firmly believe that in the coming days, a large number of satellites would be of those developed by our youth, our students, our colleges, our universities, students working in labs.
Similarly, wherever you see…go to any family…however well to do, however educated the family might be…if you speak to a young person in the family, she or he, moving away from family traditions, express the wish to do a start up or join a start up…excitedly willing to take a risk. Today, the startup culture is expanding even to smaller cities and I am seeing it as an indication of a bright future. Just a few days ago, toys in our country were being discussed. Within no time, when this caught the attention of our youth, they too resolutely decided to work towards positioning Indian toys in the world with a distinct identity. And they are trying out ever new experiments. The world is a huge market for toys…a market of 6 to 7 lakh crores. Today India’s share is miniscule. But, how to craft toys, what diversity to be lent to toys, what technology to be used, how toys should be, compatible with child psychology…these are points where the youth of the country is applying minds to…wishing to contribute something. Friends, there’s one more thing that fills the heart with joy and further strengthens the belief. And what is that…have you ever marked? Generally, what had crept into our fabric was acceptance of mediocrity…”It happens”, “It’s okay – this will do”! But now I’m noticing my country’s young minds focusing themselves on excellence. They want to do the best, using the best methods. This too will emerge as a major force for the nation.
Friends,
this time, the Olympics have created a major impact. The events at the Olympics are over; the Paralympics are going on. Whatever our country earned in this world of Sports may be little in comparison with the world, but enough has happened to bolster our belief. Today, it is not that the youth is just watching sports…the youth is also looking at possibilities associated with Sports…observing the entire eco system minutely…comprehending its potential, wishing to connect with it in some way or the other. She or he now wants to surpass conventional ways and adopt new disciplines. And my dear countrymen, now that such a momentum has been built up…Sports has begun to be discussed in every family…do tell me…should this momentum be allowed to subside, to halt now? No…not at all. Even you must be thinking on the similar lines. In the country now, Sports and Games, sportsman spirit is not to stop. In family life, in social life, in the life of the Nation, this momentum has to be accorded permanence…infusing it with energy…replenishing it with relentless new energy. At home or elsewhere, in villages or cities, our playgrounds must be filled up. Let all play – let all bloom! And I’m sure you remember what I had said from Red Fort, “Sabka Prayas”…Yes…collective endeavour. It is only through collective endeavour of all that India will attain glorious heights in Sports that she rightfully deserves. On the course charted by people such as Major Dhyanchand ji we have to move forward…it’s our responsibility. After years has the country witnessed a period where, in families, in society, in States, in the Nation, all the people are single mindedly forging a bond with Sports.
My dear young friends, taking advantage of this opportunity, we must garner expertise in a variety of sports. In villages as well, sports competitions should be held successively. It is only through competition that a sport evolves…progresses…giving rise to sportspersons as an outcome. Come, let all us countrymen strive to further this momentum as much as we can…contributing whatever we can…let us transform the mantra of ‘Sabka Prayas’ into reality.
My dear countrymen,
tomorrow also happens to be the grand festival of Janmashtmi. This festival of Janmashtami, that is the festival of birth of Bhagwan Shri Krishna. We are familiar with all the forms of Bhagwan, from naughty Kanhaiya to the one taking Colossal form Krishna, from the one well versed in scriptures to one skilled in weaponary. Be it art, beauty, charm, where all isn’t Krishna there! But I am saying all this because a few days before Jamashtami I had gone through an interesting experience. So I felt I should talk about this to you. You must be aware that on the 20th of this month the construction work related to Bhagwan Somnath temple has been dedicated to the people. 3-4 kilometers away from Somnath temple is the Bhalka Teerth, this Bhalka Teerth is the place where Bhagwan Shri Krishna spent his last moments on earth. In a way his Leelas, divine acts in this world culminated there. Many works for the development of that entire region are being done by the Somnath Trust. I was thinking of Bhalaka Teerth and the works going on there when I noticed a beautiful art-book. Someone had left this book for me outside my residence. In this there were many forms and many magnificent pictures of Bhagwan Shri Krishna. Pictures were very attractive and very meaningful. My curiosity grew all the more when I started turning the pages of the book. When I saw the book and all the pictures and the message for me written there, I felt l should meet the one who had left it for me. I should meet the one who has left the book outside my home. So my office contacted the person. Such was my curiosity on seeing the art-book, on seeing the different forms of Bhagwan Shri Krishna that I called the person to meet the very next day. With this curiosity I met Jaduarani Dasi ji. She is American, was born in America, brought up in America, Jadurani Dasi ji is connected to ISKCON, connected to Harey Krishna movement and one of her major specialities is that she is skilled in Bhakti Arts. You know that just after two days, on the 1st of September, we have the 125th birth anniversary of the founder of ISKCON Shri Prabhupaad Swami ji. Jadurani Dasi ji had come to India in this very connection. The question before me was that one who was born in America, who had been so far away from the Indian ethos; how could she make such attractive pictures of Bhagwan Shir Krishna! I had a long chat with her, but I want you to listen to some parts of it.
PM sir : Jadurani Ji, Hare Krishna!
I have read a little about Bhakti Art but tell our listeners more about it. Your passion and interest towards it is great.
Jadurani Ji : So, bhakti art we have one article in the bhakti art illuminations which explains how this art is not coming from the mind or imagination but it is from the ancient Vedic scriptures like Bhram Sanhita. Ven Omkaraya Patitam skilatam Sikand (वें ओंकाराय पतितं स्क्लितं सिकंद), from The Goswami’s of Vrindavan, from the Lord Brahma himself. Eeshwarah paramah krishnah sachchidanand vigrahah ( ईश्वर: परम: कृष्ण: सच्चिदानन्द विग्रह: ) how He carries the flute, how all of his senses can act for any other sense and Srimad bhagwatam (TCR 9.09) (Barhapeend natwarvapuh karnayoh karnakaram ) बर्हापींड नटवरवपुः कर्णयो: कर्णिकारं everything, He wears a karnika flower on his ear, He makes the impression of His Lotus feet all over the land of Vrindavan, the cow herds voicing of his Glories, His flute attracts the hearts and minds of all fortunate beings. So everything is from ancient Vedic scriptures and the power of these scriptures which are coming from transcendental personalities and the pure devotees who are bringing it the art has their power and that’s why its transformational, it is not my power at all.
PM Sir: Jadurani ji, I have different type of question for you. Since 1966 in a way and from 1976 physically you have been associated with India for long, will you please tell me what does India mean to you?
Jadurani Ji: Prime minister ji, India means everything to me. I was mentioning I think to Hon’ble President a few days ago that India has come up so much in technical advancement and following the west very well with Twitter and Instagram and iPhones and Big buildings and so much facility but I know that, that’s not the real glory of India. What makes India glorious is the fact that Krishna himself the avatari appeared here and all the avatars appeared here, Lord Shiva appeared here, Lord Ram appeared here, all the holy rivers are here, all the holy places of Vaishnav culture are here and so India especially Vrindavan is the most important place in the universe, Vrindavan is the source of all the Vaikunth planets, the source of Dwarika, the source of the whole material creation, so I love India.
PM Sir: Thank You Jadurani Ji. Hare Krishna!,
Friends,
when the people of the world pay heed to Indian spiritual systems and philosophy today, then we also have a responsibility to carry forward these great traditions. That which has perished has to be left behind, but that which is timeless has to be carried forward. Let us celebrate our festivals, understand its scientific meaning, and the connotation behind it. Not only this, there is an underlying message in every festival; there is a Sanskar as well. We not only have to know it, live it and pass it on as a legacy for generations to come. I once again wish all the countrymen a very Happy Janmashtami.
My dear countrymen,
during this Corona period, the myriad aspects of cleanliness that I should have touched upon; I feel, perhaps, that it saw a decrease. I also feel that we should not let the cleanliness campaign diminish even at the slightest. The examples of how efforts by everyone for nation building in turn lead to progress for all of us, also inspire us and infuse us with a new energy to do something, impart new confidence, give a meaning to our resolve. We know very well that whenever the topic Swachh Bharat Abhiyan comes up, the name of Indore also arises because Indore has created a special identity of its own in relation to cleanliness and the people of Indore are also entitled to felicitations. Our Indore has remained at number one in ‘Swachh Bharat Ranking’ for many years. Now the people of Indore do not want to sit satisfied with this ranking of Swachh Bharat, they want to move forward, want to do something new. And now they have decided to maintain a ‘Water Plus City’ and are striving for it with all their might.
‘Water Plus City’ means a city where no sewage is dumped into any public water source without treatment. The citizens here themselves have come forward and connected their drains with the sewer line. A Cleanliness campaign has also been started and due to this the polluted water draining in the Saraswati and Kanh rivers has also reduced considerably and an improvement is visible. Today, when our country is celebrating the Amrit Mahotsav of Independence, we have to remember that we should never let the resolve of the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan diminish. The greater the number of cities which are ‘Water Plus City’ in our country, cleanliness will increase further, our rivers will also become clean and we will be fulfilling values associated with humane responsibility of conserving water.
Friends,
before me is an example that has come from Madhubani in Bihar. Dr. Rajendra Prasad Agricultural University in Madhubani and the local Krishi Vigyan Kendra have jointly made a worthy effort. Not only farmers are accruing benefit from this scheme but it has also imparted renewed vigour to the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan. The name of this initiative of the university is – “Sukhet Model” The purpose of the Sukhet model is to reduce pollution in the villages. Under this model, dung and other household waste is collected from the farmers of the village and in return the villagers are given money for cooking gas cylinders. The work of making vermicompost from the disposed garbage collected from the village is also ongoing. Therefore, there are four benefits of the Sukhet model that are directly visible. One, the village is freed from pollution; the second is that the village is freed from filth, the third is that the money for the LPG cylinder goes to the villagers and the fourth is that the farmers of the village get bio- fertilizer. You must give it a thought as to how such efforts can increase the power of our villages. This is the basis of self-reliance. I appeal that every panchayat of the country should also think of doing something like this in their respective villages. And friends, when we set out with a goal, it is certain that we achieve the results. Now look at our Kanjirangal Panchayat of Sivaganga district in Tamil Nadu. See what this small panchayat has done, here you will get to see another model of wealth from the Waste. Here the Gram Panchayat along with the local people has started an indigenous project to generate electricity from waste in their village.The garbage is collected from the entire village, electricity is generated from it and the residual products are also sold as pesticides. The capacity of this village power plant is to dispose of two tonnes of waste per day. The electricity generated from this power plant is utilized for streetlights and other needs of the village. The money saved by the Panchayat through this scheme is being used for other developmental works. Now tell me, a small panchayat in Sivaganga district of Tamil Nadu inspires all of us countrymen to do something or not? They have achieved wonders, haven’t they?
My dear countrymen,
‘Mann Ki Baat’ is no longer confined to the borders of India. There is a discussion on ‘Mann Ki Baat’ in different corners of the world too. And there are people from our Indian community living abroad, who keep providing me with much new information. And I also like to sometimes share with you the unique programs that are going on abroad in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Even today I will introduce you to some such people, but before that I want to play an audio for you. Listen carefully.
##
[रेडियो युनिटी नाईन्टी एफ्.एम्.-2]
नमोनमः सर्वेभ्यः | मम नाम गङ्गा | भवन्तः शृण्वन्तु रेडियो-युनिटी-नवति-
एफ्.एम् –‘एकभारतं श्रेष्ठ-भारतम्’ | अहम् एकतामूर्तेः मार्गदर्शिका एवं रेडियो-
युनिटी-माध्यमे आर्.जे. अस्मि | अद्य संस्कृतदिनम् अस्ति | सर्वेभ्यः बहव्यः
शुभकामनाः सन्ति| सरदार-वल्लभभाई-पटेलमहोदयः ‘लौहपुरुषः’ इत्युच्यते | २०१३-
तमे वर्षे लौहसंग्रहस्य अभियानम् प्रारब्धम् | १३४-टन-परिमितस्य लौहस्य गलनं
कृतम् | झारखण्डस्य एकः कृषकः मुद्गरस्य दानं कृतवान् | भवन्तः
शृण्वन्तु रेडियो-युनिटी-नवति-एफ्.एम् –‘एकभारतं श्रेष्ठ-भारतम्’ |
[रेडियो युनिटी नाईन्टी एफ्.एम्.-2]
##
Friends,
you must have understood the language. This was Sanskrit being spoken on the radio and the one speaking was RJ Ganga. RJ Ganga is a member of a group of Radio Jockeys in Gujarat. Her other companions are RJ Neelam, RJ Guru and RJ Hetal. All of them together in Gujarat, in Kevadiya are currently engaged in enhancing respect for the Sanskrit language. And you also know that this is the same Kevadiya where the world’s tallest statue, the pride of our country, the Statue of Unity is located, that is the very Kevadiya I am talking about. And the radio jockeys are such that they wear multiple hats simultaneously. They also serve as guides, and also run the Community Radio Initiative, Radio Unity 90 FM. These RJs talk to their listeners in Sanskrit language, providing them with information in Sanskrit.
Friends, in these parts, it is said about Sanskrit
अमृतम् संस्कृतम् मित्र, सरसम् सरलम् वचः |
एकता मूलकम् राष्ट्रे, ज्ञान विज्ञान पोषकम् |
That is, our Sanskrit language is sweet and also simple.
Through its thoughts and medium of literary texts, Sanskrit helps nurture knowledge and also national unity, strengthens it. Sanskrit literature comprises the divine philosophy of humanity and knowledge which can captivate anyone’s attention. Recently, I got to know about many such people who are engaged in the inspirational work of teaching Sanskrit in foreign lands. One such person is Mr. Rutger Kortenhorst, a well-known Sanskrit scholar and teacher in Ireland who teaches Sanskrit to the children there. Sanskrit language also plays an important role in the strengthening of cultural relations between India and Ireland and between India and Thailand here in the east. Dr. Chirapat Prapandavidya and Dr. Kusuma Rakshamani, both of them are playing a very important role in the promotion of Sanskrit language in Thailand. They have also carried out comparative studies in literature of Thai and Sanskrit languages. Another such professor is Shriman Boris Zakharin, who teaches Sanskrit at Moscow State University in Russia. He has published many research papers and books. He has also translated many books from Sanskrit to Russian. Likewise,Sydney Sanskrit School is one of Australia’s premier institutions, where Sanskrit language is taught to the students. For children, these schools also organize programs like Sanskrit Grammar Camp, Sanskrit Plays and Sanskrit Day.
Friends,
the efforts which have been made in recent times have brought a new awareness about Sanskrit.Now is the time to increase our efforts in this direction. It is our collective duty to cherish our heritage, preserve it, pass it on to the new generation…. and future generations also have a right to it. Now is the time to increase everyone’s efforts for these works as well. Friends, if you know of any such person engaged in this kind of effort, if you have any such information, then please share the information related to them on social media with the hashtag Celebrating Sanskrit.
My dear countrymen,
in the next few days ‘Vishwakarma Jayanti’ will also be celebrated. Here, Bhagwan Vishwakarma is considered as a symbol of the creative power behind the genesis of the world. Whoever through their skill, builds an object..innovates… whether it is sewing-embroidery, software or satellite, all this is a manifestation of Bhagwan Vishwakarma. Even though skill is being recognized in a new way in the world today, our sages and seers have emphasized on skill and scale for thousands of years. They have interlinked skill, talent, ability with faith, thereby making it a part of the philosophy of our lives. Our Vedas have also dedicated many sookta to Bhagwan Vishwakarma. Whichever great creations are there, whatever new and big works have been done, our scriptures ascribe them to Bhagwan Vishwakarma. It is in a way a symbol of the thought that whatever development and innovation is happening in the world
happens only through skills.This is the very sentiment behind the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Vishwakarma and his worship. And this has been quoted in our scriptures too :
‘विश्वम कृत्-सन्म कर्म व्यापारो यस्य सः विश्वकर्मा’
Meaning, the one who takes all efforts in the process of creating and building is a Vishwakarma. In the view of our scriptures, all the skilled, talented people around us engaged in the process of creation and building are the legacy of Bhagwan Vishwakarma. Our lives without such individuals would be unfathomable.Think about it, if there is some problem with electricity in your house and you cannot find an electrician, how will it be? You will have to face a big hurdle! Our life goes on because of many such skilled people. Look around yourself; be it an ironsmith, a potter, a carpenter, an electrician, a house painter, a sanitation worker, or someone who repairs mobile-laptops. All of them are known only because of their skill. In modern form, all of them are also Vishwakarma. But friends, there is another aspect to it and it also sometimes causes concern. The situation in our country where culture, tradition, thinking, skill, manpower have been interlinked with Bhagwan Vishwakarma and how it has changed…. once upon a time, Kaushalya, our innate skills had a huge impact on our family life, social life and life of the natio. But during the long period of slavery and subjugation, the feeling that gave such respect to skill gradually faded into oblivion. The thinking became such that skill based tasks were considered inferior. And now see, today, the whole world is emphasizing the most on skill. The worship of Bhagwan Vishwakarma is also not to be completed only with formalities. We have to respect the talent, we have to work hard to be skilled. We should be proud to be skilled. When we do something new, innovate something, create something that will benefit the society, make people’s life easier, then our Vishwakarma Puja will be meaningful. There is no dearth of opportunities for skilled people in the world today. Skills are forging multiple paths of progress. Come, this time let us take a pledge to follow the message of Bhagwan Vishwakarma along with faith in his worship. The spirit of our worship should be such that we understand the importance of skill, and also give full respect to skilled people, no matter what work they do.
This is the time of the 75th year of our Independence. This year we have to make new resolutions every day, think new, and bolster our spirit to do something new. When India completes one hundred years of Independence, then only these resolutions of ours will be seen in the foundation of its successes. So, we should not let this opportunity pass. We have to contribute our maximum in this. And in the midst of all these efforts, we have one more thing to remember. दवाई भी, कड़ाई भी…vaccinate and take precautions. More than 62 crore vaccine doses have been administered in the country, but still we have to be careful, be vigilant. And yes, as always, whenever you do something new, think new, then definitely include me in that. I will be waiting for your letter and messages. With this wish, once again many felicitations to all of you for the upcoming festivals.
Thank you very much.
Namaskar!


81. SEPTEMBER 26, 2021
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. You are aware that for an important programme, I have to leave for America…hence I thought it would be apt to record Mann Ki Baat, prior to my departure to America. The day of Mann Ki Baat this September is important on another count, date wise. Routinely, we do remember a lot of days; we even celebrate myriad Days…and if you ask young sons-daughters at home, they are likely to furnish out an entire list of Days of the year with their chronological relevance! But, there is one more day that all of us must remember; this day is one that is immensely congruent to the traditions of India. It’s one that connects us with our traditions that we have been following for centuries. That is – World Rivers Day.
It has been articulated here – Pibanti Naddhah, Swayameva Naambha…meaning that rivers do not drink their own water…they give it away altruistically. For us, rivers are not mere physical entities; for us a river is a living unit…and that is exactly why we refer to rivers as Mother! Numerous festivals, festive occasions, functions of ours, occasions to rejoice take place in the very laps of these mothers.
All of you are aware – with the advent of the month of Magh, in our country, a lot of people perform Kalpvaas on the banks of mother Ganga or other rivers for an entire month. This tradition has ceased now…but in earlier times, it was customary to remember rivers while bathing at home. This tradition of remembering rivers may have gone extinct or exists sparsely…but there used to be a great tradition that would take one on a tour across the vastness of India while bathing early morning…a cerebral pilgrimage! It used to be a source of inspiration to connect with every nook and corner of the country. And of course, in India, it has been customary to chant a Shlok while bathing:
Gange cha yamune chaiva Godavari saraswati
Narmade Sindhu Kaveri Jale asmin sannidhim kuru
Earlier, at our homes, the elderly in the family would make children memorise the Shlok …this also led to germinating Aastha, faith towards rivers in our country. It would inscribe an illustrated map of the great land of India on the psyche. That used to establish an emotional connect with rivers. It would result in nurturing a harmonious credence towards the very river that embodied the Mother, sentimentally as well as visually…as a way of life too! It was a way to instill ‘Sanskaar’; the value system gamut.
Friends,
now that we are discussing the significance of rivers in our country, it is but natural for everyone to raise a question…one, in fact, has the right to do so…and answering that question is our responsibility too! Anyone can question – “you are singing so many songs dedicated to rivers, referring to a river as a Mother…then why is it that the river gets polluted? Our scriptures distinctly disapprove of polluting rivers, even a bit! And our traditions have been synchronous with the thought. You know, of course, that the western region of our India, especially Gujarat and Rajasthan, suffer from scarcity of water. They face famines, many a time. Now that is why, a new tradition has developed in the social life there. For example, when it starts raining in Gujarat, Jal-Jeelani Ekadashi is celebrated there. This means, it is synonymous with what we term as ‘Catch the Rain’ in today’s times…accumulating each and every drop of water…Jal-jeelani. On similar lines, after the rains, in Bihar and other regions of the East, the great festival of Chhatth is celebrated. I hope that keeping the Chatth Pooja in mind, preparations for cleaning and repairing riverbanks and Ghats would have commenced. We can very well undertake the endeavour of cleaning rivers and freeing them of pollution with collective effort and support. The Namami Gange Mission too is making advances today…collective efforts of all, in a way, mass awareness; a mass movement has a major role to play in that.
Friends,
when one is referring to the river; when Mother Ganga is being talked about, one is tempted to draw your attention to another aspect. When Namami Gange is being referred to, one thing is certain to draw your attention…especially that of the youth. These days, a special E-auction is being held. This electronic auction pertains to gifts presented to me by people from time to time. The money that accrues through this E-auction is dedicated solely to the Namami Gange Campaign. The affectionate, warm spirit, with which you present me gifts …that very sentiment gets bolstered through this campaign.
Friends,
in order to rejuvenate rivers throughout the country; in order to cleanse waters, the government and social service organizations keep undertaking one endeavour or the other. And this is not about the present day; it is going on for decades now. There are some people who have dedicated themselves to these causes. And it is this very tradition, this very endeavour, this very faith that has saved our rivers. Whenever such news come to my notice, from any corner of India, it evokes immense respect in my heart for people who embark upon such tasks…and I also feel like sharing that with you. Take a look at Vellore and Thiruvannamalai districts of Tamilnadu, whose example I wish to cite. A river named Naagnadi flows there. Years ago, the Naagnadi had all dried up. Because of that, the water level there had terribly gone down. But, the womenfolk there took up the cudgels to rejuvenate their river. And then…lo and behold – they got people connected, dug up canals through public participation, constructed check dams and recharge-wells. Friends, you too would be glad to know that today, the river is brimming with water. And truly, when a river is full of water, it lends such tranquility to the mind…I have actually, witnessed the experience…
Many of you might be aware that on the very banks of river Sabarmati, Mahatma Gandhi set up the Sabarmati Ashram…during the last few decades, the river had dried up. 6 to 8 months a year, no water was even visible there. But river Narmada and river Sabarmati were linked…today, if you go to Ahmedabad, the waters of river Sabarmati fill one’s heart with such joy! Similarly, our sisters from Tamilnadu are undertaking myriad such tasks…many such tasks are being done in various corners of the country. I know for sure that many of our saints, our gurus associated with our religious traditions are doing a lot for the sake of water and rivers, along with their spiritual pursuits…many of them are running campaigns to plant trees along riverbanks…at places, dirty water is being prevented from flowing into rivers.
Friends,
when we are celebrating ‘World River Day’ today, I praise and greet all dedicated to this work. But to all people living near every river; to countrymen I will urge that in India in all corners at least once in a year a river festival must be celebrated.
My dear countrymen,
never make the mistake of treating minor issues, little things as small. Through tiny efforts, at times, very significant changes occur, and if we look towards the life of Mahatma Gandhi ji we will find every moment how even small things had so much importance and how using small issues he accomplished big resolutions. Our youth today must know how the campaign for cleanliness continuously gave energy to our freedom movement.It was Mahatma Gandhi who turned cleanliness into a mass movement.
Mahatma Gandhi had connected cleanliness to the dream of Independence. Today after so many decades, the cleanliness movement has once again connected the country to the dream of a new India. And this is also becoming a campaign to change our habits too and we must not forget that this cleanliness is a programme. This cleanliness is a responsibility of the transition of sanskar from generation to generation and when the campaign for cleanliness continues generation after generation in the entire society cleanliness as a trait gets imbibed. And that is why this is not a subject of a year or two; of one government or the other government. Generation after generation, with alertness, continually, without being tired or stopping, with high reverence we have to remain associated with cleanliness and continue the campaign for cleanliness. And I have said earlier too that this cleanliness is a great tribute by this country
to revered Bapu and we have to keep paying this tribute every time; continuously.
Friends,
people know that I don’t ever let go any chance to speak in connection with cleanliness and possibly that is why a listener of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, Shriman Ramesh Patel ji has written to me that learning from Bapu, in this “Amrit Mahotsav” of freedom, we should take the resolve of economic cleanliness too. The way building of toilets enhanced the dignity of poor, similarly economic cleanliness ensures rights of the poor; eases their life. You are aware of the campaign that the country started regarding Jandhan accounts. Today, because of this the rightful money of the poor is getting credited directly into their accounts and because of this, obstacles like corruption have reduced very significantly. It is true that technology can help a lot in economic cleanliness. It is matter of delight for us that even in villages, the common person is getting connected in the direction of digital transactions through fin-tech UPI… its prevalence has begun increasing. I will tell you a figure which will make you proud; during last August, 355 crore UPI transactions took place in one month, that is more than nearly 350 crore transactions, that is, we can say that during the month of August UPI was used for digital transactions more than 350 crore times. Today, on an average, digital payments of more than 2 lakh crore Rupees is happening through UPI. Through this the economy of the country is acquiring cleanliness and transparency, and we all know that now the importance of fin-tech is increasing a lot.
Friends,
Bapu had connected cleanliness with independence; the same way he had made khadi the identity of freedom. Today in the 75 th year of freedom when we are celebrating the Amrit Mahotsav of Independence, we can say with satisfaction today that our young generation today is giving khadi the place of pride that khadi had during freedom struggle. Today the production of khadi and
handloom has increased multiple times and its demand too has increased. You too know that there were many such occasions when business of more than a crore rupees has been transacted in the khadi showroom in Delhi. I too would like to remind you again that on the 2 nd of October, on revered Bapu’s birth anniversary, let us together aim for another new record. In your city wherever khadi is sold, handloom is sold, handicraft is sold and now that the festival of Diwali is there.., for the festive season, every khadi, handloom, cottage industry purchase of yours should strengthen the campaign for ‘Vocal for Local’, it
should break all old records.
Friends,
in this period of Amrit Mahotsav, a campaign to disseminate to everyone the untold stories of the history of freedom is also going on… and for this, upcoming writers, youth of the country and the world were called upon. For this more than 13 thousand people have registered till now and that too in 14 different languages. And for me a thing of joy also is that non-resident Indians
from more than 20 countries have expressed their wish to join this campaign. There is another interesting information- more than nearly 5000 upcoming writers are searching out tales of struggle for freedom. They have taken the lead to write something on those who are unsung heroes, who are un-named, whose names don’t appear on the pages of history, on the theme of such unsung heroes, on their lives, on those events, that is the youth of the country have decided to bring forth the history of those freedom fighters who were not even discussed during the last 75 years. I appeal to all the listeners; I appeal to all those connected with the field of education. You too motivate the youth. You too come forward and it is my firm belief that during the Amrit Mahotsav of Independence the people who are working for writing history will make history as well.
My dear countrymen,
we all know about the Siachen Glacier. The cold there is so terrible that it is beyond capacity of a common person to live there. With snow spread far and wide, there is no sign of any vegetation anywhere. The temperature here dips to even minus 60 degrees. A few days ago, the feat that a team of 8 Divyang persons performed in this inaccessible region of Siachen is a matter of pride for every countryman. This team created a world record by hoisting its flag on the Kumar Post situated at an altitude of more than 15 thousand feet at the Siachen glacier.
Despite the challenges of physical ability, the feats that these Divyangs have achieved are an inspiration for the whole country and when you get to know about the members of this team, you will also be filled with courage and enthusiasm, just like I was.The names of these brave Divyangs are – Mahesh Nehra, Akshat Rawat of Uttarakhand, Pushpak Gawande of Maharashtra, Ajay Kumar of Haryana, Lobsang Chospel of Ladakh, Major Dwarkesh of Tamil Nadu, Irfan Ahmed Mir of Jammu and Kashmir and Chongjin Ingmo of Himachal Pradesh. This operation to conquer the Siachen Glacier has been successful because of the veterans of the special forces of the Indian Army. I commend the team for this historic and unprecedented achievement. It also shows the spirit of our countrymen to tackle every challenge with a “Can Do Culture”, a “Can Do Determination” and a “Can Do Attitude”.
Friends,
today many efforts are being made for the welfare of Divyangjan in the country. I got a chance to know about one such effort being made in Uttar Pradesh – “One Teacher, One Call”. This unique effort in Bareilly is showing a new path to the Divyang children. This campaign is being led by the principal of a school in Dabhaura Gangapur, Deepmala Pandey ji. During the Corona period, due to this campaign, not only did the admission of a large number of children become possible, more than 350 teachers have also joined it with a spirit of service. These teachers go from village to village calling for Divyang children, looking out for them and then ensuring their admission in one school or the other. I deeply appreciate this noble effort of Deepmala ji and her fellow teachers for the sake of Divyangjans. Every such effort in the field of education is going to shape the future of our country.
My dear countrymen,
the condition of our lives today is such that the word Corona resonates in our ears many times a day… the biggest global pandemic in a hundred years, COVID-19 has taught every countryman a lot. Today there has been an increase in curiosity and awareness about Healthcare and Wellness. Traditionally natural products which are beneficial for wellness and health are available in abundance in our country. Patayat Sahu ji, who lives in Nandol, Kalahandi, Odisha, has been doing unique work in this area for years. He has planted medicinal plants on one and a half acres of land. Not only this, Sahu ji has also carried out documentation of these medicinal plants. Satish ji of Ranchi has shared another similar information to me through a letter. Satish ji has drawn my attention to an Aloe Vera Village in Jharkhand. The women of Deori village near Ranchi had undergone training in Aloe Vera cultivation from Birsa Agricultural School under the leadership of Manju Kachhap ji. After this they started cultivating aloe vera. Not only did this farming benefit in the field of health; the income of these women also increased. They had good income even during the Covid pandemic. One of the major reasons for this was that the companies making sanitizers were buying Aloe Vera directly from them. Today a team of about forty women is involved in this work. And Aloe Vera is cultivated over many acres. Whether it is Patayat Sahu ji of Odisha or this team of women in Deori, the way they have linked agriculture with the field of health is an example in itself.
Friends,
the 2nd of October also marks the birth anniversary of Lal Bahadur Shastri ji. In his memory, this day also teaches us about those who attempt new experiments in agriculture. To promote start-ups in the field of medicinal plants, an Incubator by the name of Medi-Hub TBI is operational in Anand, Gujarat. In a very short time, this Incubator associated with medicinal and aromatic plants has supported the business idea of 15 entrepreneurs. Sudha Chebrolu ji has launched her start-up only after getting the help of this Incubator. Priority is given to women in this company and they are also responsible for innovative herbal formulations. Another such entrepreneur is Subhashree ji who has also received help from this Medicinal and Aromatic Plants Incubator. Subhashree ji’s company is working in the field of herbal room and car fresheners. She has also created a herbal terrace garden which has more than 400 medicinal herbs.
Friends,
the Ministry of Ayush has taken an interesting initiative to increase awareness about Medicinal and Herbal Plants among children and Professor Ayushman ji has taken the lead. It is possible that you must be wondering who Professor Ayushman is! Actually Professor Ayushman is the name of a comic book. In this, short stories have been prepared through different cartoon characters. Along with this, the usefulness of healthy medicinal plants like Aloe Vera, Tulsi, Amla, Giloy, Neem, Ashwagandha and Brahmi has been mentioned. Friends, in the current context, with the trend of people around the world regarding medicinal plants and herbal products increasing, India has immense potential. In the past, there has been a significant increase in the export of Ayurvedic and herbal products.
I urge scientists, researchers and people associated with the start-up world to pay attention to such products, which not only increase the wellness and immunity of the people, but also help in increasing the income of our farmers and youth.
Friends,
moving beyond traditional farming, novel initiatives and options are being done in agriculture and are continuously creating new means of self-employment. The story of two brothers from Pulwama is also an example of this. The way Bilal Ahmed Sheikh and Munir Ahmed Sheikh found new avenues for themselves in Pulwama, Jammu and Kashmir, they are an example of New India.39 years old Bilal Ahmed ji is highly qualified, he has obtained many degrees. He is now using his experience of higher education by launching his own start-up in agriculture.Bilal ji has installed a unit of Vermi composting at his home. The bio-fertilizer prepared from this unit has not only benefited a lot in agriculture ; it has also brought employment opportunities to the people.Every year, farmers are getting about three thousand quintals of Vermicompost from the units managed by these brothers. Today 15 people are also working in this Vermicomposting unit. A large number of people are reaching to see this unit, and most of them are young people who want to do something in the agriculture sector. The Sheikh brothers of Pulwama took a pledge to become a job creator instead of a job seeker and today they are showing a new path not only to Jammu and Kashmir, but to the people across the country as well.
My dear countrymen,
the 25th of September is the birth anniversary of a great son of the country, Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay ji. Deen Dayal ji is one of the greatest thinkers of the last century.His economic philosophy, his policies aimed at empowering the society, the path of Antyodaya shown by him remain as relevant in the present context and are also inspirational. Three years ago, on his birth anniversary, the 25th of September, the world’s largest health assurance scheme – Ayushman Bharat scheme was implemented. Today, more than two and a half crore impoverished people of the country have got free treatment up to Rs 5 lakh in the hospital under the Ayushman Bharat scheme. Such a massive scheme for the poor is dedicated to the Antyodaya philosophy of Deen Dayal ji. If the youth of today inculcate values and ideals into their lives, it can be of great benefit to them. Once in Lucknow, Deen Dayal ji had said – “How many good things, good qualities there are – we derive all these from the society itself. We have to pay the debt of society, we must think on these lines .” That is, Deen Dayal ji taught us that we take so much from society, from the country, whatever it be, it is only because of the country ; thus we should think about how we will repay our debt towards the country. This is a significant message for today’s youth.
Friends,
from the life of Deen Dayal ji, we also get a lesson to never give up. Despite the adverse political and ideological circumstances, he never wavered from the vision of a Swadeshi, home grown model for the development of India. Today many young people want to move ahead by breaking away from the oft-treaded paths. They want to do things their own way. Deen Dayal ji’s life can teach them a lot. That is why I urge our youngsters to definitely know about him.
My dear countrymen,
we touched upon many topics today. Like we were discussing, the time to come is of festivals. The whole country is also going to celebrate the festival of the victory over untruth by Maryada Purushottam Shri Ram. But during this festival we have to remember about one more fight – that is the country’s fight against Corona. Team India is making new records everyday in this fight. With regards to Vaccination, the country has made many such records which are being talked about the world over. Every Indian has an important role in this fight. We have to get the vaccine administered when our turn comes, but we also have to take care that no one is left out of this circle of safety. Those around you who have not got vaccinated also have to be taken to the vaccine center. Even after getting vaccinated, the necessary protocol has to be followed. I hope that once again Team India will keep the flag flying high in this fight. Next time, we will discuss some more topics in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Wishing you all, every countryman the best for the fortcoming festivals.
Thank You!


82. OCTOBER 24, 2021
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar…namaskar a billion times! And I am saying ‘koti-koti namaskar’ also since after crossing the 100 crore vaccine doses, the country is surging ahead with a new zeal; renewed energy. The success of our vaccine programme displays the capability of India…manifests the might of our collective endeavour.
Friends,
the figure of 100 crore vaccine doses might surely be enormous, but there are lakhs of tiny inspirational and pride-evoking experiences, numerous examples that are associated with it. Many people are asking in their letters to me how, with the commencement itself of the vaccine, I had developed the belief that this campaign would achieve such a huge success! I had this firm faith, since I am well acquainted with the capabilities of my country and her people. I knew that our healthcare workers would leave no stone unturned in the vaccination of our countrymen. Our health workers, through their tireless efforts and resolve, set a new example…they established a new benchmark in service to humanity through innovation and sheer determination. There are innumerable instances about them that convey how they crossed all hurdles and provided the security shield to the maximum number of people. We’ve often read in newspapers, heard elsewhere as well how hard our people have worked to undertake this task; numerous inspiring examples are there in front of us, one better than the other. Today in Mann ki Baat, I want to introduce to the listeners, one such healthcare worker, Poonam Nautiyal ji from Bageshwar in Uttarakhand. Friends, she is from Bageshwar, part of the very land of Uttarakhand which accomplished the task of administering cent percent of the first dose. The government of Uttarakhand also rightfully deserves accolades since it’s a remote area with difficult terrain. Similarly, Himachal too has completed the task of cent-percent doses amid such difficulties. I am given to understand that Poonam ji has persevered day and night for the vaccination of people in her area.
PM – Poonam ji Namaste
Poonam – Sir Pranam
PM – Poonamji, just tell the country’s listeners something about yourself!
Poonam – Sir, I am Poonam Nautiyal. Sir, I work at the Chaani Koraali Centre in Bageshwar District, Uttarakhand. I am an ANM Sir.
PM – Poonam ji, I am fortunate to have got an opportunity to come to Bageshwar. In a way, it has been a pilgrimage site…there’s an ancient temple as well…I was deeply touched…wonder how people would have managed the task centuries ago!
Poonam – Yes Sir
PM – Poonam ji, have you undertaken the vaccination of all the people in your area?
Poonam – Yes Sir, all people are done with it…
PM – Did you also have to face hurdles of any kind?
Poonam – Yes Sir. Sir, when it used to rain there, the road used to get blocked. We’ve gone crossing the river Sir. And we have gone house to house, just as we’ve gone under the NHCVC…for people who were not able to come to the centre…the elderly, divyang people, pregnant women, lactating women…these people Sir!
PM – But there in the hills, houses too are situated rather distantly!
Poonam – Ji
PM – So, in a day, how much could you manage?
Poonam – Sir in terms of kilometres – 10 kilometres; at times 8!
PM – Well, people who stay in the terai plains would not be able to understand what 8-10 kilometres mean! I know that 8-10 kilometres in the hills mean consuming an entire day!
Poonam – Yes…
PM – But since for an entire day, it must have been an arduous task…along with lugging and carrying all the vaccination apparatus…did any assistant accompany you or not?
Poonam – Yes…team members…we were five people Sir!
PM – Yes…
Poonam –That comprised a doctor, then the ANM, the pharmacist, the ASHA worker and the data entry operator.
PM – O…was connectivity available there or you would do it after returning to Bageshwar?
Poonam – Sir, at places it was available…at times we would do it after coming to Bageshwar.
PM – Okay. I’ve been told Poonam ji, that you went out of the way to get people vaccinated. What was this idea…how did the thought come to your mind and how did you manage it?
Poonam – All of us…the entire team had taken a resolve that not a single person should be left out…the Corona ailment should be made to run away from our country. ASHA and I together prepared a village wise DUE list…and then accordingly, people who came to the centre were administered at the centre itself. Then we went from home to home. Sir, after that, people who were left out…those who could not make it to the centre…
PM – Okay…did you have to explain people?
Poonam – Yes…had to explain…
PM – Are people still keen to get vaccinated?
Poonam – Yes Sir, Yes…Now people have realized. Initially we faced a lot of problems. People had to be convinced that this vaccine is safe; effective as well…that we too had been vaccinated and we are well…right in front of you…all our staff have had it…we are fine!
PM – At any place, was any complaint received from anyone? Later?
Poonam – No no Sir. This did not happen.
PM – Nothing happened?
Poonam – Ji
PM – All were satisfied?
Poonam – Yes
PM – That it’s fine…
Poonam – Yes
PM– Well…you have accomplished a great feat. And I know how difficult the entire area is, along with trudging through the hills! One climbs up a hill…then descends…then walk up another hill…houses too are located afar! Despite that, you accomplished this impressive task!
Poonam – Thank you Sir. Am fortunate to have spoken to you!
PM – It is on account of the hard work put in by lakhs of health workers like you that India could cross the hundred crore vaccine doses mark. Today, I am gratefully expressing thanks, not just to you but to every Bharatvasi, every Indian who raised the ‘Sabko vaccine – Muft vaccine’ campaign to such lofty heights of success. Many good wishes to you and family from my side.
My dear countrymen,
you are aware that next Sunday, the 31st of October is the birth anniversary of Sardar Patel ji. On behalf of every listener of Mann ki Baat…and from myself…I bow to the Lauh Purush, the Iron Man. Friends, we celebrate the 31st of October as National Unity Day.
It is our duty that we must associate ourselves with some activity that conveys the message of national unity. You must have noticed that recently Gujarat Police took out a Bike rally from the Lakhpat Fort in Kutch to the Statue of Unity. To celebrate Unity Day the personnel of Tripura Police are organising a Bike Rally from Tripura to the Statue of Unity… That is connecting the country from East to West. Personnel of Jammu- Kashmir police too are giving this message of unity of the country by taking out a similar Bike Rally from Uri to Pathankot. I salute all these jawans. I have also come to know of many sisters from Kupawara district of Jammu-Kashmir itself. In Kashmir, these sisters are working to make the Tricolour for the Army and government offices. This work is brimming with the sentiment of patriotism. I appreciate the spirit of these sisters. You too must do something for the unity of India, for the greatness of India. You will see how satisfying this is.
Friends,
Sardar Sahab used to say- “We can take our country to loftier heights only through our united efforts. If we don’t have unity amongst ourselves, we will get entangled in ever new calamities”. That is, with national unity, the nation has stature and has development. We can learn a lot from the life and thoughts of Sardar Patel. The Information and Broadcasting Ministry of the country has recently published a pictorial biography of Sardar Saheb too.I would want that all our young friends must read this. By this you will get a chance to know of Sardar Saheb in an interesting way.
Dear countrymen,
life desires continuous progress, desires development, desires to surpass heights. However much science may advance, however much the pace of progress may be, however grand the buildings may be, life feels incomplete. But when song-music, art, drama-dance, literature is added to these, their aura , their liveliness increases many times. In a way if life has to be meaningful, all these too are as necessary….that is why it is said that all these forms act as a catalyst in our lives, act to enhance our energy. The role of songs – music and other art forms is major in developing the inner self of humans, in creating the path of journey of our inner self. And another strength of these is that neither time nor boundaries can limit them…not even beliefs or discordance can limit these. The colours of one’s art, culture, song, music must certainly be filled in Amrit Mahotsav too. I too am getting several suggestions from you regarding Amrit Mahotsav and this strength of songs-music-arts. These suggestions are very valuable for me. I had sent them to the Culture Ministry for analysis. I am happy that in such a short time span the Ministry took up the suggestions very seriously and has also worked on it. One of these suggestions is of a competition on patriotic songs! During the freedom struggle patriotic songs and devotional songs in different languages, dialects had united the entire country. Now in this Amrit kaal, our young people can instill this event with energy by writing such patriotic songs. These patriotic songs can be in the mother tongue, can be in national language, and can be written in English too. But it is essential that these creations reflect the thought of new India; inspired by the current success of the country, it should be such that fuels the country’s resolve for the future. The Culture Ministry is geared to conduct a competition related to this from tehsil to the national level.
Friends,
similarly a listener of “Mann Ki Baat” has suggested that Amrit Mahotsav should be connected to the art of Rangoli too. For centuries, we have had a tradition of lending colours to festivals through Rangoli. The diversity of our country is visible in Rangoli. Rangoli is drawn in different states with different names and on different themes. Therefore, the Ministry of Culture is also going to conduct a National Competition associated with this. Just imagine, when a Rangoli related to the freedom movement will be created, people will draw a picture of a hero of the freedom struggle at their door, on their wall and depict an event of our independence movement with colours, hues of the Amrit festival will also increase manifold.
Friends,
we also have another art form known as Lori. Here, samskars are inculcated in young children through lullabies and they are introduced to the culture. Lullabies also have their own diversity. So why don’t we, in the Amritkaal period, revive this art also and write lullabies pertaining to patriotism, write poems, songs, something or the other which can be easily recited by mothers in every home to their little children. In these lullabies there should be reference to modern India, the vision of 21st century India and its dreams. The ministry has decided to organize a competition related to it after receiving suggestions from the listeners.
Friends,
these three competitions are going to commence on the birth anniversary of Sardar Sahib from 31st October. In the coming days, the Ministry of Culture will provide all the information related to these events. This information will also be available on the website of the ministry, and will be circulated through social media. I want you all to be associated with this. Our young friends must showcase their art, their talent in this. Through this the art and culture of your area will also reach every nook and corner of the country, your stories will be heard by the whole country.
Dear countrymen,
during this period of Amrit Mahotsav, we are remembering the brave sons and daughters of the country, those great and virtuous souls. Next month, the birth anniversary of one such icon and a brave warrior, Bhagwan Birsa Munda ji is falling on the 15th of November. Bhagwan Birsa Munda is also known as ‘Dharti Aaba’. Do you know what this epithet means? It means the father of earth. The way Bhagwan Birsa Munda fought to protect his culture, his forest, his land, it could have only been done by ‘Dharti Aaba’! He taught us to be proud of our culture and roots. The foreign rule subjected him to countless threats and applied immense pressure, but he did not relinquish the tribal culture.
If we have to learn to love nature and the environment, then for that too, Dharati Aaba Bhagwan Birsa Munda is one of our greatest inspirations. He strongly opposed every such policy of foreign rule, which was detrimental for the environment. Bhagwan Birsa Munda was always at the forefront while helping the poor and the distressed. He also made the society aware towards eliminating social evils. Who can forget his leadership during the Ulgulan movement! This movement shook the British and as an aftermath the British had placed a huge reward on Bhagwan Birsa Munda. The British government put him in jail; he was tortured to such an extent that he left us at the age of less than 25years. He left us, but only in the body; in the public psyche, Lord Birsa Munda resides forever! His life remains an inspirational force for the people. Even today folk songs and stories, full of his courage and valour are very popular in the central region of India. I bow to ‘Dharti Aaba’ Birsa Munda and urge the youth to read more about him. The more you know about the unique contribution of our tribal populace in the freedom struggle of India, the more you will feel proud.
My dear countrymen,
today on 24th October, UN Day i.e. ‘United Nations Day’ is celebrated. This is the day when the United Nations was established; India has been a member since the formation of the United Nations. Do you know that India had signed the Charter of the United Nations in 1945 prior to independence. A unique feature related to the United Nations is that the woman power of India has played a large role in increasing the influence and strength of the United Nations.
In 1947-48, when the Universal Declaration of UN Human Rights was being drafted, it was being inscribed in that Declaration “All Men are Created Equal”. But a Delegate from India objected to this and then it was written in the Universal Declaration – “All Human Beings are Created Equal”. This was in consonance with India’s age-old tradition of Gender Equality. Did you know that Smt. Hansa Mehta was the delegate because of whom this became possible? At the same time, another delegate Smt. Lakshmi Menon had strongly put forth her views on the issue of gender equality. And not only this, in 1953, Smt. Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit became the first woman President of the UN General Assembly.
Friends,
we are the people of a land, who believe and pray:
Om Dyau Shanti-Rantariksha-GwamShantih,
Prithvi Shanti-Rapah Shanti-RoshadhayahShantih।
Vanas-Patayah Shanti-VishwedDevah Shanti-Brahma Shantih,
Sarvag-WamShantih Shanti-Reva Shantih Sa Ma Shanti-Redhi॥
Om ShantihShantihShantih॥
India has always strove for world peace. We are proud of the fact that India has been a part of UN peacekeeping missions continuously since the 1950s.India is also playing a leading role in addressing issues related to poverty alleviation, climate change and workers. Apart from this, India is working closely with WHO or World Health Organization to popularize Yoga and AYUSH. In March 2021, WHO announced that a Global Centre for Traditional Medicine would be set up in India.
Friends,
today while talking about the United Nations I’m also remembering the words of Atal ji. In 1977, he made history by addressing the United Nations in Hindi. Today I want to play an excerpt of Atal ji’s address for the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Listen to Atal ji’s resounding voice –
” Here I am not thinking about the supremacy and prominence of nations. The esteem and advancement of the common man are of more importance to me. Ultimately, the only criterion to measure our successes and failures is whether we strive to assure justice and dignity to the entire humanity, virtually every man, woman and child.”
Friends,
these words of Atal ji show us the way even today. India’s contribution in making this earth a better and safer planet is a big inspiration for the entire world.
My dear countrymen,
just a few days ago, on the 21st of October, we celebrated Police Commemoration Day. On this day we especially remember our brave hearts of the police who have laid down their lives in the service of the country. Today I would like to remember these policemen along with their families. A tough service like the police is very difficult without the support and sacrifice of the family.
There is one more thing related to police service that I want to convey to the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Earlier it was believed that services like army and police are meant only for men. But today it is not so. The statistics from the Bureau of Police Research and Development show that in the last few years, the number of women police personnel has doubled. In 2014, while their number was close to 1 lakh 5 thousand, by 2020 it has increased by more than double and this number has now reached up to 2 lakh 15 thousand.
Even in the Central Armed Police Forces, the number of women has almost doubled in the last seven years. And I’m not talking just about numbers. Today the daughters of the country are performing even the toughest duties with full force and zeal. For example, many daughters are currently undergoing one of the most difficult trainings, that of Specialized Jungle Warfare Commandos. They will be a part of our Cobra Battalion. Friends, today when we go to airports, metro stations or see government offices, brave women of CISF are seen guarding every sensitive place.
The most positive effect of this is on the morale of our police force as well as society. The presence of women security personnel naturally instills a sense of confidence among the people, especially women. They naturally feel connected to women security personnel. Because of the sensitivity in women, people tend to trust them more. These policewomen of ours are also becoming role models for lakhs of other daughters of the country. I would like to request the women police personnel to visit the schools in their areas once the schools open and talk to the girls there.
I am sure that this conversation will give a new direction to our new generation. Not just that, it will also increase public confidence in the police. I hope that more women will join the police service in future, lead the New Age Policing of our country.
My dear countrymen,
in the last few years, the pace at which the use of modern technology has increased in our country, the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ often keep writing to me about it. Today I want to discuss with you one such topic, which has caught the imagination of our country, especially our youth and even little children. This topic is of Drones, of the Drone Technology. Up until a few years ago, when the name of Drone used to come up, what used to be the first feeling in the minds of the people?… Of the army, of weapons, of war. But today if we have any wedding procession or function, we see a drone shooting photos and videos. The spectrum of a drone’s usage and its capabilities is not just limited to that. India is one of the first countries in the world, which is preparing digital records of land in its villages with the help of drones. India is working extensively on using drones for transportation. Whether it is farming in the village or delivery of goods at home; Providing help in emergency or monitoring law and order ; it is not long before we will see drones being deployed for all these needs of ours. Most of these have already started. Like a few days ago, nano-urea was sprayed in the fields through drones in Bhavnagar, Gujarat. Drones are also playing their role in the Covid vaccine campaign. We got to see a picture of this in Manipur, where vaccines were delivered via a drone to an island. Telangana has also done trials for vaccine delivery by drone. Not just that, drones are also being used to monitor many big infrastructure projects. I have also read about a young student who, with the help of his drone, worked to save the lives of fishermen. Friends, earlier there were so many rules, laws and restrictions in this sector that it was not possible to unlock the real capabilities of a drone. The technology that should have been seen as an opportunity was seen as a crisis. If you have to fly a drone for any work, then there was such a hassle of license and permission that people would give up on the mere mention of the name of drone. We decided that this mindset has to be changed and new trends have to be adopted. Which is why on the 25th of August this year, the country brought forward a new drone policy. This policy has been formulated according to the present and future prospects related to drones. With this, you will neither have to be entangled in the web of multiple forms anymore, nor will you have to pay as much fees as before. I am happy to inform you that after the introduction of the new drone policy, foreign and domestic investors have invested in many drone start-ups. Many companies are also setting up manufacturing units. The Army, Navy and Air Force have also placed orders worth more than Rs 500 crores with the Indian drone companies. And this is just the beginning. We must not stop here. We have to become a leading country in Drone Technology. For this, the Government is taking all possible steps. I will also urge the youth of the country to certainly think about taking advantage of the opportunities created after the Drone Policy and come forward.
My dear countrymen,
a listener of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, Shrimati Prabha Shukla from Meerut in UP has sent me a letter related to cleanliness. She has written – “We all celebrate cleanliness during festivals in India. Similarly, if we make cleanliness a daily habit, then the whole country will become clean.” I appreciate Prabha ji’s message. Indeed, where there is cleanliness, there is health, where there is health, there is capability, and where there is capability, there is prosperity. That is why the country is giving so much emphasis on Swachh BharatAbhiyan.
Friends,
I was happy to know about Saparom Naya Sarai, a village near Ranchi. There used to be a pond in this village, but people had started using this pond area for defecating in the open. Under the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, after toilets were built in everyone’s homes, the villagers thought why not make the village clean as well as beautiful. Lo and behold! Everyone got together and made a park at the place of the pond. Today that place has become a community spot for people, for children. This has brought a big change in the life of the whole village. I also want to tell you about the women of Deur village of Chhattisgarh. The women here run a self-help group and work together to clean the village squares, roads and temples.
Friends,
the people of Ghaziabad in UP know Ramveer Tanwar as the ‘Pond Man’. Ramveer ji was doing a job after completing his mechanical engineering. However, such a sense of devotion for cleanliness ignited in his mind that he left his job and started cleaning ponds. So far, Ramveer ji has revived many ponds by cleaning them.
Friends,
the efforts of cleanliness can be fully successful only when every citizen understands cleanliness as his or her responsibility. Now, during Diwali, we are all about to get involved in cleaning our houses. But during this time we have to take care that our neighbourhood along with our house should also be clean. It should not be that we clean our house, but the dirt of our house reaches outside, on our roads. And yes, when I talk about cleanliness, then please do not forget the mantra of getting rid of Single Use Plastic. Come, let us take a pledge that we will not let the enthusiasm of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan diminish. Together, we will make our country completely clean and keep it clean!
My dear countrymen,
the whole month of October is painted in the hues of festivals and after a few days from now Diwali will be around the corner. Diwali, then Govardhan Puja, then Bhai Dooj, these three festivals shall of course be there and there will also be Chhath Puja during this interregnum. It is also the birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev Ji in November. When so many festivals happen together then their preparations also start long before. All of you must have started planning for shopping from now on, but do you remember, shopping means ‘VOCAL FOR LOCAL’. If you buy local, then your festival will also be illuminated and the house of a poor brother or sister, an artisan, or a weaver will also be lit up. I am sure that the campaign which we all have started together will be stronger this time during the festivals. Do share on social media about the local products you buy from there too. Inform those around you too. We’ll meet again next month, and we’ll once again discuss many such topics.
Many thanks to all of you! Namaskar !




83. NOVEMBER 28, 2021
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. We are connecting once again today for Mann Ki Baat. Two days later, the month of December is commencing…and with the onset of December, we psychologically feel “O…the year has concluded!” This is the last month of the year and one starts sketching out plans for the New Year. This month itself, the country also celebrates Navy Day and Armed Forces Flag Day. All of us know that on the 16th of December, the country is also celebrating the golden jubilee of the 1971 War. On all these occasions, I remember the country’s Armed Forces…I remember our brave hearts. And especially, I remember the brave mothers who give birth to such bravehearts. As always, this time too, I have received numerous suggestions from all of you on the Namo App and MyGov. Considering me to be a part of your family, you have also shared your lives’ joys and sorrows. In that, there are many young people; students as well! I really feel good for the fact that this Mann Ki Baat family of ours is continually growing…connecting with hearts and connecting through goals too. And our ever deepening bonds are creating a surge of a flow of constant positivity within us.
My dear countrymen,
Ojaswi from Sitapur has written to me that he enjoys discussions touching upon the Amrit Mahotsav, a lot. He listens to Mann Ki Baat with his friends and is continuously trying to know and learn more about the Freedom Struggle. Friends, the Amrit Mahotsav, along with learning, also inspires us to do something for the country. And now, throughout the country, whether it’s common folk or governments; from Panchayats to Parliament, the resonance of the Amrit Mahotsav is palpable…programmes in connection with the Mahotsav are going on successively. One such interesting programme was held in Delhi recently. In the programme, ‘Azadi Ki Kahani – Bachchon Ki Zubani’, children narrated stories connected with the Freedom Struggle from the core of their hearts. The special element in that was – along with India, students from Nepal, Mauritius, Tanzania, New Zealand and Fiji too participated in that activity. Our country’s Maharatna, ONGC too is celebrating the Amrit Mahotsav in a slightly different manner. These days, ONGC is organizing study tours to oil fields for our students. In these tours, youth are being imparted knowledge on ONGC’s Oil Field Operations…with the objective that our budding engineers be able to contribute their bit to nation building efforts with full zest and fervor.
Friends,
keeping in view the contribution of our tribal communities in attaining Freedom, the country has also celebrated the ‘Janajati Gaurav Saptah’. Across different regions of the country, programmes related to that were held. In the Andaman-Nicobar archipelago, people from tribal communities such as Jarwa and Onge vibrantly displayed their culture. Miniature Writer Ram Kumar Joshi ji from Una, Himachal Pradesh too has done some remarkable work…on tiny postage stamps, he has drawn outstanding sketches of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose and former Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri. On the word ‘Ram’ written in Hindi, a brief biography of both the great men has been inscribed. Some friends from Katni, Madhya Pradesh have conveyed information on a memorable Dastangoi, story-telling programme. In that, memories of the indomitable courage and sacrifice of Rani Durgavati have been rekindled. One such programme took place in Kashi. A three-day Festival was organized in honour of illustrious luminaries such as Goswami Tulsidas, Sant Kabir, Sant Ravidas, Bharatendu Harishchandra, Munshi Premchand and Jaishankar Prasad. In different periods, all of them played a major role in fostering public awakening in the country. You might be aware…in the last episodes of Mann Ki Baat, I had referred to three competitions – one was on writing patriotic songs; one on drawing Rangolis on events connected with patriotic fervor and the Freedom movement and one on scripting lullabies that nurture dreams of a grand India in the minds of our children. I hope that you certainly must have sent in your entries too for these competitions…you must have made plans as well…you must have discussed it among friends too! I hope you will promote this programme in every corner of India with wholehearted enthusiasm.
My dear countrymen, in this discussion, I now straightaway take you to Vrindavan. It is said about Vrindavan that it is a tangible manifestation of God’s love. Our saints too have remarked:
“Yeh aasa dhari chitta mein, yeh aasa dhari chitta mein
Kahat jathaa mati mor
Vrindavan sukh rang kau, Vrindavan sukh rang kau
Kaahu na payau aur”
Meaning, We all refer to the glory of Vrindavan, according to our own capabilities…but the inner joy of Vrindavan, its inherent spirit…nobody can attain it in its entirety…it is infinite. That is exactly why Vrindavan has been attracting people from all over the world. You will find its mark in every corner of the world.
There is a city in Western Australia – Perth. Cricket lovers must be well acquainted with the place since cricket matches are often held there. In Perth, there is an art gallery called Sacred India Gallery. This gallery has been set up in the beautiful region of Swan Valley and it is the result of the efforts of a resident of Australia Jagat Tarini Dasi ji. Jagat Tarini ji is actually an Australian…born and brought up there, but she came to Vrindavan and spent more than 13 years here. She says that though she returned to Australia…came back to her own country…but she could never forget Vrindavan. That’s why, in order to stay spiritually connected with Vrindavan, she created Vrindavan in Australia itself. Making her art a medium, she set up a marvelous Vrindavan.. People who come here get an opportunity to view myriad artefacts. They get to see glimpses of the most famous pilgrimage centres of India – the traditions and culture of Vrindavan, Navaadweep and Jagannathpuri. Here, many an artwork related to the life of Bhagwan Shrikrishna has been exhibited. There is an artifact as well, that displays the Govardhan Parvat, held aloft by Bhagwan Shrikrishna on his little finger, with people of Vrindavan taking refuge beneath. Indeed, this matchless endeavour on part of Jagat Tarini ji brings to the fore the power of Krishna-Bhakti. I extend my best wishes on this effort of hers.
My dear countrymen,
I was just referring to the subject of Vrindavan, built at Perth, Australia. There’s an interesting history as well…in that, Australia shares a bond with our Jhansi, Bundelkhand. Actually, when the Queen of Jhansi Laxmibai was fighting a legal battle against the East India Company, her lawyer was John Lang. John Lang was originally a resident of Australia. Staying in India, he fought Rani Laxmibai’s case. All of us know of the huge contribution of Jhansi and Bundelkhand in our Fight for Freedom. Veeranganas, brave hearts such as Rani Laxmibai and Jhalkaribai hailed from here…this region has given to the country legendary sports persons like Major Dhyanchand too.
Friends,
it is not necessary that bravery should be displayed only on the battlefield. When bravery becomes a vow and it expands, then many feats start getting accomplished in every field. Mrs. Jyotsna has written a letter to me about very such valor. There was a traditional river in Jalaun – Noon River. Noon, used to be the main source of water for the farmers here, but gradually the Noon river reached the verge of extinction, the little existence that was left of this river, in that it was turning into a drain. Due to this, problems in irrigation had also arisen for the farmers. The people of Jalaun took the initiative to change this situation. This very year in March, a committee was formed for this. Thousands of villagers and local people spontaneously volunteered to join this campaign. The panchayats here started working together with the villagers, and today in such a short time, and at a very low cost, the river has come back to life again. So many farmers are benefiting from this! Apart from the battlefield, this example of bravery shows the determination of our countrymen, and it also tells that if we take a resolve, nothing is impossible and that is why I say – ‘Sabka Prayas’…everyone’s effort.
My dear countrymen,
when we conserve nature, in return nature also gives us protection and security. We experience this in our personal life as well and one such example has been presented by the people of Tamil Nadu on a large scale. This is the example of Thoothukudi district of Tamil Nadu. We know that coastal areas are many a time prone to land submersion. There were many such small islands and islets in Thoothukudi too, which were increasingly in danger of submerging in the sea. The people here and the experts found the mitigation from this natural disaster through nature itself. These people are now planting Palmyra trees on these islands. These trees stand firm even in cyclones and storms and give protection to the soil. Through this now a new confidence has arisen in saving this area.
Friends,
nature poses a threat to us only when we disturb her balance or destroy her sanctity. Nature nurtures us like a Mother and fills our world with vivid colors too.
I have been watching on social media the picture of a flying boat in Meghalaya that is becoming viral. This picture catches our attention at the very first sight itself. Most of you must have certainly seen it online. When we look closely at this boat floating in the air, we come to know that it is moving on the river water. The water of the river is so clear that we can see its bed and the boat seems to be floating in the air. There are many states in our country ; there are many areas where people have preserved the colors of their natural heritage. These people have kept the lifestyle of living in harmony with nature alive even today. This is an inspiration to all of us too. Whatever natural resources are around us, we should save them, bring them back to their actual form. In this lies the interests of all of us ; interests of the world.
My dear countrymen,
when the government makes plans, spends the budget, completes the projects on time, people feel that it is working. But in the many works of the government, amidst the many schemes of development, things related to human sensitivities always give a different kind of joy. With the efforts of the government, with the schemes of the government, the way a life changed… what is the experience of that changed life? When we hear this, we too are filled with empathy. It also gives satisfaction to the mind and gives inspiration too to take that scheme to the people. In a way, it is just ‘Swant: Sukhay’, joy to one’s own soul and that is why today in “Mann Ki Baat” two such friends are also joining us who have won a new life through their zeal. They got their treatment done with the help of Ayushman Bharat scheme and have started a new life. Our first friend is Rajesh Kumar Prajapati who had an ailment of the heart – heart disease.
So let’s talk to Rajesh ji –
Prime Minister – Rajesh ji Namaste.
Rajesh Prajapati – Namaste Sir Namaste.
Prime Minister – What was your disease Rajesh ji? You must have gone to some doctor, just explain to me what the local doctor must have said… you must have also gone to some other doctor? Then you would not have been able to take the decision or would have taken, what all used to happen?
Rajesh Prajapati – Ji the problem was with my heart Sir. I used to have a burning sensation in the chest, Sir, then I showed it to the doctor. The doctor at first said “Son, maybe you have acid”… so I got treatment for acid quite some time, when I did not benefit from it, then showed it to Dr. Kapoor, then he said son, the symptoms you have will become clear by angiography, then he referred me to ShriRam Murthy. Then we met Amresh Agarwal ji, so he did my angiography. Then he said “Son, there is blockage in your vein”, so I said sir, how much will it cost? Then he said that there is a card of Ayushman which PM ji made. Then I said sir, I have it with me. Then he took that card of mine and all my treatment has been done with that card. Sir and this card that you have made in a very good way and for us poor people is very convenient. And how can I thank you!
Prime Minister – What do you do Rajesh ji?
Rajesh Prajapati – Sir, presently I am doing a private job. Sir
Prime Minister – And how old are you?
Rajesh Prajapati – I am forty nine years old, Sir.
Prime Minister – You got heart trouble at such a young age?
Rajesh Prajapati – Yes sir what to say now!
Prime Minister – In your family, earlier did your father or mother have such a thing?
Rajesh Prajapati – No sir, nobody had sir, this has happened first with me only.
Prime Minister – This Ayushman card, Government of India gives this card. This is a big scheme for the poor, so how did you come to know of it?
Rajesh Prajapati – Sir, this is such a big scheme, poor people get a lot of benefit from it and are so happy sir. I have seen in the hospital how many facilities people get from this card when they tell the doctor that they have the card. Sir, the doctor then says, okay bring that card and I will treat you with the same card.
Prime Minister – Ok, if you did not have the card, how much expenses the doctor had told you?
Rajesh Prajapati – The doctor had said that son, it will cost a lot if the card is not there. So I said sir, I have the card, so he asked me to show it immediately, so I showed it immediately. All my treatment was done with the same card, not a single penny of mine was spent, all the medicines have also been issued through the same card.
Prime Minister – So Rajesh ji, you are satisfied now, your health is fine?
Rajesh Prajapati – Sir, thank you very much sir, may you live so long that you always remain in power and our family members are also happy with you, what to say!
Prime Minister: Rajesh ji, don’t wish me for being in power, I am not in power even today and I don’t want to be in power in future also. I only want to be in service; for me this post, this Prime Ministership, all these things are not at all for power, brother, they are for service.
Rajesh Prajapati: Service is what we need… what else!
Prime Minister: See this Ayushman Bharat scheme for the poor in itself…
Rajesh Prajapati: Yes Sir, it is a very nice thing
Prime Minister: But see Rajesh ji, you do one thing for us, will you?
Rajesh Prajapati: Yes, absolutely Sir!
Prime Minister: See what happens – people do not know about it, you should take on a duty, find out how many poor families are around you, and how you benefited from it, how did you get help? Do tell them!
Rajesh Prajapati: Will absolutely tell Sir.
Prime Minister: And do tell them that they should also get such a card made because the family does not know when a problem may come and it is not right that the poor remain bothered on account of medicines today. Now, because of money they do not take medicine or do not seek the remedy of the disease then it is also a matter of great concern, and what happens to the poor as you’ve had this heart problem, for many months you would not have been able to work.
Rajesh Prajapati: I could not walk ten steps, I could not climb stairs Sir.
Prime Minister: So Rajesh ji, by becoming a good friend of mine, you can explain this Ayushman Bharat scheme to as many poor people as you can. By the way, you can help the sick people, see you will also be satisfied and I will be very happy that come on Rajesh ji’s health not only became fine but Rajesh ji got the health of hundreds of people better. This Ayushman Bharat scheme, it is for the poor, it is for the middle class, it is for the common families, so this information must be conveyed to every house by You !
Rajesh Prajapati: Will definitely convey Sir. I stayed there for three days in the hospital, Sir, so many poor people came to the hospital and told them about all the facilities ; if there is a card, it will be done for free.
Prime Minister: Alright, Rajesh ji, keep yourself healthy, worry a little about your body, take care of the children and wish you a lot of progress. I wish you all the best.
Friends, we listened to Rajesh ji, now Sukh Devi ji is joining us. A knee problem had bothered her a lot, let us first listen from Sukhdevi ji about her plight and then how succour came to her, let us understand
Modi ji – Sukhdevi ji Namaste! Where are you speaking from?
Sukhdevi ji – from Danadpara.
Modi ji – Where does this lie?
Sukhdevi ji – in Mathura.
Modi ji – In Mathura, then Sukhdevi ji, one has to say Namaste and say Radhe-Radhe as well!
Sukhdevi ji – Yes, Radhe-Radhe!
Modi ji – Well I heard that you were suffering. Have you had any operation? Can you tell what is the matter?
Sukhdevi ji – Yes, my knee was damaged, so I have had an operation in Prayag Hospital |
Modi ji – how old are you Sukhdevi ji?
Sukhdevi ji – My age is 40 years.
Modi ji – 40 years ! And named Sukhdevi ! And Sukhdevi got sick?
Sukhdevi ji – I got sick when I was about 15-16 years old.
Modi ji – OMG! Your knees got affected at such a young age?
Sukhdevi ji – What is that called.. arthritis – gout pain in the joints, the knee got worse due to that.
Modi ji – So from the age of 16 to 40, you did not get treatment for this?
Sukhdevi ji – No, it was treated. Small time doctors who kept on giving medicine for pain, this is that desi medicine, this is that medicine. Quacks! I was able to walk with them but the knees got worse, I had only walked 1-2 kilometers and then my knees got worse.
Modi ji – So Sukhdevi ji how did the idea of ​​ operation come about? How did you manage the money for it? How did all of this happen?
Sukhdevi ji – I have got the treatment done with the Ayushman card.
Modi ji – So you had got an Ayushman card?
Sukhdevi ji – Yes.
Modi ji – And there is free treatment for the poor with Ayushman card. Did you know this?
Sukhdevi ji – There was a meeting in the school. From there, my husband came to know and he got the card made in my name.
Modi ji – Yes.
Sukhdevi ji – Then I got the treatment done by card, and I did not spend any money. I have been treated by the card itself. It has been a great treatment.
Modi ji – Good. If there was no card, how much cost did the doctor say earlier?
Sukhdevi ji – 2.5 lakh rupees, three lakh rupees. For 6-7 years I’ve been on the cot! I used to say that oh God call me, I don’t want to live!
Modi ji : you were on the cot for 6-7 years! Good God!
Sukhdevi ji – Yes.
Modi ji – Oho!
Sukhdevi ji – Couldn’t get up at all!
Modi ji – So now your knee is better than before?
Sukhdevi ji – I walk around a lot. I roam! I do kitchen work! I do housework! I cook for the children.
Modi ji – So the card of Ayushman Bharat has really made you Ayushman, blessed with long life.
Sukhdevi ji – Thank you very much! Because of your scheme, I got cured, I got back on my feet.
Modi ji – So now even the children must be happy ?
Sukhdevi ji – Yes. The children used to face a lot of trouble. Now if the mother is upset, naturally the child will also be upset.
Modi ji – Look, our health is the biggest happiness in our lives, that everyone should get this cheerful life is the essence of Ayushman Bharat. Sukhdevi ji, I wish you all the very best, Radhe-Radhe to you once again.
Sukhdevi ji – Radhe – Radhe, Namaste!
My dear countrymen, in every country with a large youth population, three aspects matter a lot. Sometimes, it becomes the true identity of the youth. The first aspect is – Ideas and Innovation. The second is the spirit of taking risks and the third is the Can Do Spirit, that is, the determination to accomplish any task, no matter how adverse the circumstances be – when these three things combine, phenomenal results are produced, miracles happen. These days, all we hear about from every corner is about Start-up, Start-up, Start-up. It is true, this is the era of start-up, and it is also true that in the world of start-up, India is leading in a way in the world today. Start-ups are getting record investment year after year. This sector is progressing very fast. The reach of start-ups has increased even in small towns of the country. These days the word ‘Unicorn’ is in vogue. You all must have heard about it. ‘Unicorn’ is a start-up whose valuation is at least 1 Billion Dollars, that is more than about seven thousand crore rupees.
Friends,
till the year 2015, there used to be hardly nine or ten Unicorns in the country. You will be very happy to know that now India is flying high even in the world of Unicorns. According to a report, a big change has come this year. In just 10 months, a unicorn is being raised in India every 10 days. This is also a big thing because our youth have achieved this success in the midst of the corona pandemic. Today there are more than 70 Unicorns in India. That is, there are more than 70 start-ups that have crossed the valuation of more than 1 billion. Friends, due to the success of Start-Ups, everyone has noticed them and the way they are getting support from investors from all over the country and abroad. Perhaps, just a few years ago no one could have imagined this happening.
Friends,
Indian youth are also contributing to the solution of global problems through start-ups. Today we will talk to a young Mayur Patil, he along with his friends have tried to put forward a solution to the problem of pollution.
Modi ji – Mayur ji Namaste.
Mayur Patil – Namaste Sir ji.
Modi ji – Mayur ji how are you?
Mayur Patil – Just fine sir. How are you ?
Modi ji – I am very happy. Ok tell me…You are in the start-up world.
Mayur Patil – Ji
Modi ji – and doing the ‘best’ out of the ‘waste’…
Mayur Patil – Ji
Modi ji – And for the environment too, tell me a little about yourself. Tell us about your work and how did you get the idea behind this work?
Mayur Patil – Sir, I had a motorcycle when I was in college. Its mileage was extremely low and emissions were very high. It was a two stroke motorcycle. Thus, in order to reduce the emissions and increase its mileage by a bit, I started trying. Sometime in 2011-12, I managed to increase the mileage by about 62 kilometres per liter. From there, I got the inspiration to make something that can be mass produced, so that it can be of benefit to many people. So, in 2017-18 we developed its technology and used it in 10 buses of the Regional Transport Corporation. We then checked the results and found that we managed to reduce emissions by forty percent in these buses.
Modi ji – Hmm! Now this technology which you have developed, have you got its patent registered?
Mayur Patil – Haan Ji! It has been patented. This year, it came to us through a patent grant.
Modi ji – And what is your plan to scale it further? How are you doing that? With the result of the buses being received, many other pieces of information must have come out too. What are you thinking of next?
Mayur Patil – Sir, under the aegis of Start-Up India..NITI Aayog has launched the Atal New India Challenge. From there we got the grant and on the basis of that grant, we just started our factory where we can manufacture air filters.
Modi ji – So how much grant did you get from the Government of India?
Mayur Patil – 90 Lakhs
Modi Ji – 90 Lakhs
Mayur Patil – Ji
Modi ji – and your work is done with it.
Mayur Patil – Yes, it has started now. It is in the process.
Modi ji – How many of your friends are doing all of this together?
Mayur Patil – We are four people Sir.
Modi ji – And all four used to study together earlier and from that you got an idea to move forward?
Mayur Patil – Ji! Ji! We were still in college. And in college we thought about all of this and it was my idea that I should at least reduce the pollution of my motorcycle and increase the mileage.
Modi ji – Ok, so if we reduce pollution and increase mileage, how much is the average money that can be saved?
Mayur Patil – Sir, we tested the mileage on the motorcycle, and increased its mileage from 25 Kilometers per liter to 39 Kilometers per liter, that is there was a gain of about 14 kilometers… And 40 percent carbon emissions were reduced. When we tested on the Regional Transport Corporation buses, there was an increase in fuel efficiency by 10 percent and the emissions reduced by 35 to 40 percent.
Modi ji – Mayur, I enjoyed talking to you and do congratulate your friends on my behalf…. You found a solution to the problem that you had in college life and now the path chosen by all of you is providing solutions in solving environmental issues and you have taken up cudgels to address it. And it is the power of the youth of our country that they take up any big challenge and look for avenues. I wish you all the best. Thank you very much
Mayur Patil – Thank you Sir! Thank you!
Friends,
a few years back if someone used to say that he wants to do business or wants to start a new company, then, the elders of the family used to answer that – “Why don’t you want to do a job, have a job bhai! There is security in the job, there is salary. The hassle is also less. But, if someone wants to start their own company today, then all the people around him are very excited and also fully supportive. Friends, this is the turning point of India’s growth story, where people are now not only dreaming of becoming job seekers but also becoming job creators. This will further strengthen India’s stature on the global stage.
My dear countrymen,
today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we talked about Amrit Mahotsav. We discussed how our countrymen are fulfilling new resolutions in this AmritKaal and also mentioned the stories related to the valour of our Army in the month of December. In the month of December, another big day is ahead of us from which we take inspiration. This day is the death anniversary of Babasaheb Ambedkar on 6th December. Baba Saheb had devoted his entire life in rendering his duties for the country and society. We the countrymen should never forget the basic spirit of our Constitution, that our Constitution expects all of us to discharge our duties – so let us also take a pledge that in the Amrit Mahotsav, we will try to fulfill our duties with full devotion. This shall be our true tribute to Baba Saheb.
Friends,
we are now entering the month of December. It is natural that the next ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of 2021 will be the last ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of this year. We will start the journey again in 2022 and yes, I keep expecting a lot of suggestions from you and will keep doing so. How are you bidding farewell to this year, what are you going to do in the new year, please do tell and yes!… Don’t forget that Corona has not gone yet. It is the responsibility of all of us to take precautions.
Many many thanks!


84. DECEMBER 25, 2021
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today we are coming together for the ninety-sixth (96) episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. The next episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ will be the first episode of the year 2023. In the messages sent by you, you have also urged to speak about the departing 2022. Observation of the past always gives us inspiration for preparations for the present and the future. In 2022, the strength of the people of the country, their cooperation, their resolve, their expansion of success was of such magnitude that it would be difficult to include all of those in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. 2022 has indeed been very inspiring, wonderful in many ways. This year India completed 75 years of her independence and this very year Amritkal commenced. This year the country gained a new momentum, all the countrymen performed one better than the other. The various successes of 2022, today, have created a special place for India all over the world. 2022 i.e. India attaining the status of the world’s fifth largest economy; 2022, i.e. the record of India surpassing the incredible figure of 220 crore vaccines; 2022,i.e. India crossing the magical exports figure of 400 billion dollars; 2022, i.e. adopting the resolution of ‘Self-reliant India’ by the people, enliving it; 2022 meaning welcoming India’s first indigenous Aircraft Carrier INS Vikrant, 2022 meaning India’s glory in Space, Drone and Defence Sector, 2022 meaning India’s might in every field | Even in the field of sports, be it the Commonwealth Games, or the victory of our women’s hockey team, our youth have shown tremendous potential.
Friends, along with all this, the year 2022 will always be remembered for one more reason. This is the extension of the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’. The people of the country also organized many amazing events to celebrate unity and togetherness. Be it the Madhavpur Mela in Gujarat, where Rukmini’s marriage, and Lord Krishna’s relationship with the Northeast is celebrated, or the Kashi-Tamil Sangamam, many colors of unity were visible in these festivals. In 2022, the countrymen have scripted another chapter of immortal history. Who can forget the ‘Har GharTiranga’ campaign organised in the month of August! Those were the moments giving every countryman goose bumps. In this campaign of 75 years of independence, the whole country assumed the hues of the tricolor. More than 6 crore people even sent selfies with the tricolor. This Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav will continue in the same way next year as well – it will further strengthen the foundation of Amrit Kaal.
Friends, this year India has also got the responsibility of chairing the G-20 group. I had also discussed this in detail last time. In the year 2023, we have to take the enthusiasm of G-20 to new heights; make this event a mass movement.
My dear countrymen, today the festival of Christmas is also being celebrated with great fervour all over the world. It is a day to remember the life and teachings of Jesus Christ. I wish you all a Merry Christmas.
Friends, today is also the birthday of our respected Atal Bihari Vajpayee ji. He was a great statesman who gave exceptional leadership to the country. He has a special place in the heart of every Indian. I have received a letter from Aasthaji from Kolkata. In this letter, she has mentioned about her recent visit to Delhi. She writes that during this, she took time out to visit the PM Museum. She liked Atal ji’s gallery very much in this museum. The picture clicked there with Atal ji has become memorable for her. In Atal ji’s gallery, we can have a glimpse of his valuable contribution to the country. Be it infrastructure, education or foreign policy, he strove to take India to new heights in every field. I once again solemnly bow to Atal ji from the core of my heart.
Friends, tomorrow, the 26th of December is ‘Veer Bal Diwas’ and I will have the privilege of participating in a programme dedicated to the martyrdom of Sahibzada Zorawar Singh ji and Sahibzada Fateh Singh ji in Delhi on this occasion. The country will always remember the sacrifice of Sahibzade and Mata Gujri.
My dear countrymen, it is said here –
Satyam kim pramanam, pratyaksham kim pramanam.
That is, truth does not require proof, what is evident also does not require proof.
But when it comes to modern Medical Science, the most important thing is – Evidence. Lack of evidence based research in the context of our scriptures like Yoga and Ayurveda has always been a challenge which has been a part of Indian life for centuries- results are visible, but evidence is not. But, I am happy that in the era of Evidence-based medicine, Yoga and Ayurveda are now standing up to the touchstone of tests of the modern era. All of you must have heard about the Tata Memorial center in Mumbai. This institute has earned a name for itself in Research, Innovation and Cancer care. An intensive research done by this center has revealed that yoga is very effective for breast cancer patients. Tata Memorial Center has presented the results of its research in the very prestigious Breast cancer conference held in America. These results have attracted the attention of the world’s biggest experts. Because, Tata Memorial center has conveyed with evidence how patients have benefited from Yoga. According to the research of this center, regular practice of yoga has reduced the risk of recurrence and death of breast cancer patients by 15 percent. This is the first example of Indian traditional medicine being tested vis a vis the stringent standards of Western methods. Also, this is the first study, in which yoga has been found to improve the quality of life in women affected by breast cancer. Its long term benefits have also come to the fore. The Tata Memorial Center has presented the results of its study at the European Society of Medical Oncology conference in Paris.
Friends, In today’s era, the more evidence-based Indian medical systems are, the more their acceptance will increase in the whole world. With this thought, an effort is also being made in Delhi’s AIIMS. Here, the Center for Integrative Medicine and Research was established six years ago to validate our traditional medical practices. Latest Modern Techniques and Research Methods are used in this. The center has already published 20 papers in reputed international journals. A paper published in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology describes the benefits of yoga for patients suffering from syncope. Similarly, in a Paper of Neurology Journal, in Migraine, the benefits of yoga have been explained. Apart from these, studies are being done regarding the benefits of yoga in many other diseases as well. Like Heart Disease, Depression, Sleep Disorder and problems faced by women during pregnancy.
Friends, a few days ago I was in Goa for the World Ayurveda Congress. Delegates from more than 40 countries participated in it and more than 550 Scientific Papers were presented here. Around 215 companies from around the world including India displayed their products in the exhibition here. In this expo which went on for four days, more than one lakh people enjoyed their experience related to Ayurveda. Even in the Ayurveda Congress, I reiterated the point for evidence based research to the Ayurveda experts gathered from all over the world. The way we all are seeing the power of Yoga and Ayurveda in this time of the Corona global pandemic, evidence-based research related to these will prove to be very significant. I also urge you that if you have any information about such efforts related to Yoga, Ayurveda and our traditional treatment methods, then do share them on social media.
My dear countrymen, in the last few years we have overcome many major challenges related to the health sector. Full credit for this goes to the willpower of our Medical Experts, Scientists and countrymen. We have eradicated diseases like Smallpox, Polio and ‘Guinea Worm’ from India.
Today, I would like to tell the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ about another challenge, which is now about to end. This challenge, this disease is ‘Kala Azar’. The parasite of this disease is spread through the sting of the sand fly. When someone has ‘Kala Azar’, one has fever for months, there is anemia, the body becomes weak and the weight also decreases. This disease can happen to anyone from children to elders. But with everyone’s efforts, this disease named ‘Kala Azar’ is now getting eradicated rapidly. Till recently, the scourge of Kala-azar had spread in more than 50 districts across 4 states. But now this disease is confined to only 4 districts of Bihar and Jharkhand. I am sure, the strength and awareness of the people of Bihar-Jharkhand will help the government’s efforts to eliminate ‘Kala Azar’ from these four districts as well. I also urge the people of ‘Kala Azar’ affected areas to keep two things in mind. One is – control of sand fly, and second, diagnosis and complete treatment of this disease as soon as possible. The treatment of ‘Kala Azar’ is easy; the medicines used for this are also very effective. You just have to be alert. Do not be negligent if you have fever, and also keep spraying medicines that kill the sand fly. Just think, when our country will be free from ‘Kala Azar’, it will be a matter of joy for all of us. In this spirit of Sab ka Prayas, we are also working towards eradication of T.B. in India, by 2025. You must have seen, in the recent past, when the T.B. Mukt Bharat campaign started, thousands of people came forward to help the T.B. patients. These people, as Nikshay Mitras, are taking care of the patients, helping them financially. This power of public service and public participation achieves every difficult goal with certainty.
My dear countrymen, our tradition and culture have an unbreakable connection with Ma Ganga. Ganga water has been an integral part of our way of life and it is also said in our scriptures:-
Namami Gange Tav Paad Pankajam,
Sur Asurai: Vandit Divya Roopam |
Bhuktim cha muktim cha dadasi nityam,
Bhaav Anusaaren Sadaa Naraanaam ||
Meaning, O Mother Ganga! You bestow worldly happiness, bliss and salvation on your devotees according to their wishes. All worship your holy feet. I also offer my salutations at your holy feet. Amid that, it is a big responsibility of all of us to keep clean Mother Ganges that has been flowing for centuries. With this objective, eight years ago, we started the ‘Namami Gange Campaign’. It is a matter of pride for all of us that, today, this initiative of India is getting appreciation from all over the world. The United Nations has included the ‘Namami Gange’ mission in the world’s top ten initiatives to restore the ecosystem. It is even more heartening that ‘Namami Gange’ has received this honor among 160 such initiatives from all over the world.
Friends, the biggest source of energy behind the ‘Namami Gange’ campaign is the continuous participation of the people. In the ‘NamamiGange’ campaign, Ganga Praharis and Ganga Doots also have a big role to play. They are engaged in spreading awareness through planting trees, cleaning ghats, Ganga Aarti, street plays, painting and poems. A lot of improvement is also being seen in Biodiversity due to this campaign. There has been a significant increase in the number of different species of Hilsa fish, Gangetic dolphin and turtles. With Ganga’s ecosystem being clean, other livelihood opportunities are also increasing. Here I would like to discuss the ‘Jalaj Ajeevika Model’, which has been prepared keeping Biodiversity in mind. This Tourism-based Boat Safaris has been launched at 26 Locations.
Obviously, the spread of the ‘Namami Gange’ mission, its scope, has increased much more than the cleaning of the river. Whereas this evidence is direct proof of our willpower and tireless efforts, on the other hand, it is also going to show a new path to the world in the direction of environmental protection.
My dear countrymen, when the power of our resolve is strong, even the biggest challenge becomes easy. The example of this has been set by Sange Sherpa ji of Thegu village of Sikkim. For the last 14 years, he is engaged in the work of environmental protection at an altitude of more than 12,000 feet. Sange ji has taken up the task of keeping clean the Tsomgo (Somgo) lake that is of cultural and mythological importance. With his untiring efforts, he has changed the look and feel of this glacier lake. When Sange Sherpa ji started this campaign of cleanliness in the year 2008, he had to face many difficulties. But within no time, along with the youth and villagers, the panchayat also started offering full support in this noble work. Today, if you go to see the Tsomgolake, you will find huge garbage bins all around there. Now the garbage collected here is sent for recycling. Garbage bags made of cloth are also given to the tourists coming here so that the garbage is not strewn around. Now about 5 lakh tourists reach here every year to see this very clean lake. Sange Sherpa has also been honored by many organizations for this unique effort to conserve Tsomgo (Somgo) lake. Due to such efforts, today Sikkim is counted among the cleanest states of India. Along with Sange Sherpa ji and his colleagues, I also heartily appreciate the people engaged in the noble effort of environmental protection across the country.
Friends, I am happy that the ‘Swachh Bharat Mission’ has become firmly rooted in the mind of every Indian today. Since the inception of this mass movement in the year 2014, to take it to new heights, many unique efforts have been made by the people.
These efforts are being made not only within the society but also on part of the government. The result of these continuous efforts is that – due to the removal of garbage, removal of unnecessary items, a lot of space opens up in the offices, new space is available. Earlier, due to lack of space, offices had to be maintained on rent at far off places. These days, due to this cleanliness, so much space is available, that, now, all the offices are converging at one place. In the past, even the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting also made a lot of effort in its offices in Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Kolkata, Shillong in many cities and because of that, today they have two, three floors, available completely in usage anew. Due to this cleanliness in itself, we are getting the best experience of optimum utilizations of our resources. In the society as well as in the villages, cities and even in the offices; even for the country, this campaign is proving useful in every way.
My dear countrymen, a new awareness is dawning in our country about our art and culture, a new consciousness is awakening. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we often discuss such examples. Just as art, literature and culture are the collective capital of the society, in the same way, it is the responsibility of the whole society to take them forward. One such successful effort is being made in Lakshadweep. There is a club on Kalpeni Island – Kummel Brothers Challengers Club. This club inspires the youth to preserve the local culture and traditional arts. Here the youth are trained in the local art Kolkali, Parichakli, Kilipaat and traditional songs. That is, the old heritage is being protected in the hands of the new generation, is moving forward and friends, I am happy that such efforts are being made not only in the country but also abroad. Recently news came in from Dubai that the Kalari club there has registered its name in the Guinness Book of World Records. Anyone could think that if Dubai’s club set a record, what is its relation with India? Actually, this record is related to Kalaripayattu, the ancient martial art of India. This record is for the performance of Kalari by the maximum number of people simultaneously. Kalari club Dubai, together with Dubai Police, planned this and displayed it on the National Day of UAE. In this event, people ranging from 4 years old children to 60 years olds showed their best ability of Kalari. This is a wonderful example of how different generations are carrying forward an ancient tradition, with full inner enthusiasm.
Friends, I would also like to inform the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ about ‘Quemashree’ ji, who lives in Gadak district of Karnataka. In the South, ‘Quemshree’ has been continuously engaged for the last 25 years in the mission of reviving the art-culture of Karnataka. You can imagine how great his Tpasya is! Earlier he was associated with the profession of Hotel Management. But, his attachment to his culture and tradition was so deep that he made it his mission. He created a platform by the name of ‘Kala Chetna’. This platform, today, organizes many programs of artists from Karnataka and from India and abroad. In this, many innovative endeavours are also undertaken to promote local art and culture.
Friends, this enthusiasm of the countrymen towards their art and culture is a manifestation of the feeling of ‘pride in our heritage’. In our country, there are so many such colors scattered in every corner. We should also work continuously to adorn and preserve them.
My dear countrymen, many beautiful and useful things are made from bamboo in many areas of the country. There are skilled bamboo artisans, skilled artists, especially in tribal areas. Ever since the country changed the British-era laws related to bamboo, a huge market has developed for it. Even in areas like Palghar in Maharashtra, tribal people make many beautiful products from bamboo. Things like boxes, chairs, teapots, baskets, and trays made of bamboo are becoming very popular. Not only this, these people also make beautiful clothes and decorations from bamboo grass. This is also providing employment to tribal women and their talent is also getting recognition.
Friends, a couple from Karnataka is sending many unique products made from betelnut fiber to the international market. This is a couple from Shivamogga in Karnataka – Shriman Suresh and his wife Shrimati Maithili. These people are making many decorative things ranging from trays, plates and handbags from betel nut fiber. Chappals made of this fiber are also being liked a lot today. Today their products are being sold in London and other markets of Europe. This is the very quality of our natural resources and traditional skills, which is being liked by everyone. In this traditional knowledge of India, the world is looking at ways of a sustainable future. We ourselves also need to be more and more aware in this direction. We ourselves should use such indigenous and local products and gift them to others as well. This will also strengthen our identity, strengthen the local economy, and, in large numbers, brighten the future of the people.
My dear countrymen, now we are slowly moving towards the unprecedented milestone of the 100th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I have received letters from many countrymen, in which they have expressed great inquisitiveness about the 100th episode. I would like it if you send me your suggestions for what we should talk about in the 100th episode and how to make it special. Next time we will meet in the year 2023. I wish you all the best for the year 2023.
May this year also be special for the country, may the country keep touching new heights, and together we have to take a resolution as well as make it come true. At this time many people are also in the mood for holidays. Enjoy these festivals a lot, but be a little cautious too. You are also seeing that, Corona is increasing in many countries of the world, so we have to take more care of precautions like mask and hand washing. If we are careful, then we will also be safe and there will be no hindrance in our enjoyment. With this, once again many best wishes to all of you. Thank you very much, Namaskar.






85. JANUARY 30, 2022
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today we are coming together through yet another episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. This is the first ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of 2022. Today we will once again take forward discussions which are related to the positive inspirations and collective efforts of our country and countrymen. Today is also the death anniversary of our revered Bapu Mahatma Gandhi ji. The 30th of January reminds us of the teachings of Bapu. Just a few days ago, we celebrated Republic Day as well. The display of the nation’s valour and strength, which we witnessed on Rajpath in Delhi filled everyone with pride and enthusiasm. One change you must have noticed is that now the Republic Day functions will start from the 23rd of January, i.e. the birth anniversary of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose and will continue till the 30th of January i.e. Gandhiji’s death anniversary. A digital sculpture of Netaji has also been installed at India Gate. We can never forget the way the country welcomed this, the wave of joy that arose from every corner of the country; the kind of feelings expressed by every countryman.
Friends, in the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, the country is re-establishing its national symbols through these efforts. We saw that the ‘Amar Jawan Jyoti’ near India Gate and the Jyoti lit at the ‘National War Memorial’ in the vicinity, were merged. There were tears in the eyes of many countrymen and martyr families on this emotional occasion. At the ‘National War Memorial’, the names of all the bravehearts of the country who have been martyred since Independence have been inscribed. Some former soldiers of the army have written to me saying that – “The ‘Amar Jawan Jyoti’ lit at the memorial is a symbol of the immortality of the martyrs”. Truly, like ‘Amar Jawan Jyoti’ our martyrs, their inspiration and their contribution are also immortal. I would urge all of you to certainly visit the ‘National War Memorial’ whenever you get an opportunity. Do take along your family and children too. Here you will feel a different energy and inspiration.
Friends, in the midst of these events of Amrit Mahotsav, many important national awards were also given away in the country. One of them is the Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Baal Puraskaar. These awards are given to the children who have rendered courageous and inspirational work at a young age. We all must highlight about these children in our homes. Our children will also get inspiration from this and the enthusiasm to bring glory to the country will be awakened in them. Padma awards have also just been announced in the country. There are many names among the recipients of Padma awards, about whom very few people know. These are the unsung heroes of our country, who have done extraordinary deeds in ordinary circumstances. For example, Basanti Devi of Uttarakhand, who has been honored with Padma Shri, lived her whole life in the midst of struggles. Her husband died at an early age and she had started living in an ashram. Staying there, she fought to save the river and made an extraordinary contribution to the environment. She has also done a lot of work for the empowerment of women. Similarly, 77-year-old Lorembam Beino Devi of Manipur has been conserving the Liba textile art of Manipur for decades. She has also been awarded the Padma Shri. Arjun Singh of Madhya Pradesh has received Padma award for imparting recognition to the art of Baiga tribal dance. Another person to receive the Padma award is Shriman Amai Mahalinga Naik. He is a farmer and hails from Karnataka. Some people also call him Tunnel Man. He has made such innovations in agriculture, seeing which anyone could be surprised. Small farmers are getting huge benefit from his efforts. There are many more such unsung heroes who have been honoured by the country for their contribution. You must try to know about them. We will get to learn a lot from them in life.
My dear countrymen, all of you send a lot of letters and messages, including many suggestions in connection with The Amrit Mahotsav. Under this series something has happened which is unforgettable for me. More than one crore children have written to me through their ‘Mann Ki Baat’ post cards. These one crore post cards have come from different parts of the country; they have also come from abroad. I have tried to take time out to read many of these post cards. These postcards show how broad and wide is the vision of our new generation for the future of the country. I have shortlisted some postcards for the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ which I want to share with you. Like this one is the post card of Riddhima Swargiyari from Guwahati, Assam. Riddhima is a student of class 7th and she has written that she wants to see an India in the 100th year of independence which is the cleanest country in the world, completely free of terrorism, included in the 100 percent literate countries, Zero accident country, and be capable of food security with sustainable technology. Riddhima, what our daughters think, the dreams they see for the country, do come true. When everyone’s efforts come together, when your young generation will work towards this goal, you will definitely make India the way you want her to be. I have also got a post card of Navya Verma of Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh. Navya has written that her dream for 2047 is of an India where everyone has a dignified life, where farmers are prosperous and there is no corruption.
Navya, your dream for the country is very commendable. The country is also moving rapidly in this direction. You talked about a corruption free India. Corruption hollows the country like a termite. Why wait for 2047 to get rid of it? All of us countrymen, today’s youth have to do this work together, as soon as possible and for this it is very important that we give priority to our duties. Where duty is felt, Duty is paramount, corruption cannot even think of entering there.
Friends, in front of me is another postcard of Mohammed Ibrahim from Chennai. Ibrahim wants to see India as a major power in the field of defence in 2047. He wants that India should have its own research base on the Moon, and that India should start the work of settling the human population on Mars. Ibrahim also sees a big role for India in making the earth free from pollution. Ibrahim, nothing is impossible for a country that has youth like you.
Friends, I have another letter in front of me sent by Bhavna, a class 10th student of Saraswati Vidya Mandir in Raisen, Madhya Pradesh. First of all, I will say to Bhavna that I really liked the way you have decorated your postcard with the Tricolor. Bhavna has written about revolutionary Shirish Kumar.
Friends, I have also received Laurencio Pereira’s postcard from Goa. She is a student of class 12th. The subject of her letter is also – Unsung Heroes of Freedom. I am sharing with you its essence in Hindi. She has written that Bhikaji Cama was one of the bravest women involved in the Indian freedom struggle. She carried out many campaigns in the country and abroad to empower daughters; organized many exhibitions. Certainly Bhikaji Cama was one of the most courageous women of the freedom movement. In 1907, she hoisted the Tricolor in Germany. The person who supported her in designing this Tricolor was Shri Shyamji Krishna Varma. Shri Shyamji Krishna Varma ji died in 1930 in Geneva. His last wish was that after India’s independence, his ashes should be brought to India. Although his ashes should have been brought back to India on the very next day of independence in 1947, this did not happen. Maybe it was the wish of the Almighty to assign me this work… and I was fortune to fulfil this duty. In the year 2003, when I was the Chief Minister of Gujarat, his ashes were brought to India. A memorial has also been constructed in the memory of Shyamji Krishna Varma ji at his birth place, Mandvi in ​​Kutch.
Friends, the enthusiasm of India’s Azaadi ka Amrit Mahotsav is not limited to our country. I have also received 75 postcards from Croatia, a friendly country of India. Students of the School of Applied Arts and Design in Zagreb, Croatia have sent these 75 cards to the people of India and congratulated them on the Amrit Mahotsav. On behalf of all countrymen, I thank Croatia and her people.
My dear countrymen, India has been the sacred land of education and knowledge. We have not confined education to bookish knowledge, but have seen it as a holistic experience of life. The great personalities of our country have also had a deep relationship with education. While Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya ji founded the Banaras Hindu University, Mahatma Gandhi played an important role in the establishment of Gujarat Vidyapeeth. There is a very lovely place in Anand, Gujarat – Vallabh Vidyanagar. On the insistence of Sardar Patel, two of his associates, Bhai Kaka and Bhikha Bhai, established education centres for the youth there. Similarly, Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore established Shantiniketan in West Bengal. Maharaja Gaikwad was also one of the ardent supporters of education. He got many educational institutions built and inspired many personalities including Dr.Ambedkar and Shri Aurobindo for higher education. In the list of such great personalities, there is also the name of Raja Mahendra Pratap Singh ji. Raja Mahendra Pratap Singh ji had handed over his house for the establishment of a technical school. He gave a lot of financial help for the construction of education centers in Aligarh and Mathura. Sometime back I also had the privilege of laying the foundation stone of a university in his name in Aligarh. I am happy that the same vibrant spirit of taking the light of education to the people continues in India even today. Do you know what is the most beautiful thing about this feeling? That is, this awareness about education is visible at every level in the society. The example of Taimmal ji living in Udumalpet block of Trippur district of Tamil Nadu is very inspiring. Taimmal ji does not have any land of her own. For years, her family is making a living by selling coconut water. The financial condition may not be good, but Taimmal ji had left no stone unturned to educate her son and daughter. Her children studied in Chinnaveerampatti Panchayat Union Middle School. One day in the meeting with the parents in the school, it was raised that the condition of the classrooms and school should be improved; the school infrastructure should be fixed. Taimmal ji was also in that meeting. She heard everything. In the same meeting, the discussion again came to a halt on the paucity of money for these works. After this, no one could have imagined what Taimmal did. Taimmal ji, who had accumulated some capital by selling coconut water, doanted one lakh rupees to the school.
Indeed, it takes a big heart, a sense of service, to do this. Taimmal ji says that in the school that is there has classes till 8th standard. Now when the infrastructure of the school improves, classes till higher secondary education will be held. This is the same sentiment I was talking about regarding education in our country. I have also come to know about a similar donation by an alumnus of IIT BHU. Jai Chaudhary, alumnus of BHU, donated one million dollars i.e. about seven and a half crores to IIT BHU Foundation.
Friends, in our country there are many people belonging to different fields, who are fulfilling their responsibility towards the society by helping others. I am very happy that such efforts are being seen continuously in the field of higher education especially in our different IITs. There is no dearth of such inspiring examples in Central Universities as well. To further enhance such efforts, from September last year, Vidyanjali Abhiyan has also been started in the country. Its objective is to improve the quality of education in schools across the country with the participation of various organizations, CSR and private sector. Vidyanjali is furthering the spirit of community participation and ownership. To be constantly connected with your school, college, to contribute something according to your ability, it is something whose fulfilment and joy can be felt only through experience.
My dear countrymen, love for nature and compassion for every living being, this is our culture as well as innate nature. A glimpse of these Sanskaras of ours was seen recently when a tigress left the world in Pench Tiger Reserve of Madhya Pradesh. People used to call this tigress collared tigress. The Forest Department named it T-15. The death of this tigress made people so emotional as if someone of their own had left the world. People performed her last rites, bid her farewell with full respect and affection. You must have also seen these pictures on social media. This love of Indians for nature and living beings was greatly appreciated the world over. The collared tigress gave birth to 29 cubs in her lifetime and raised 25 of them to maturity. We also celebrated this life of T-15 and when she left the world, we also gave her a heartfelt farewell. This is the specialty of the people of India. We make a relationship of love with every conscious being. We also got to see a similar sight this time in the Republic Day parade as well. In this parade, the charger mount of the President’s Bodyguard, Virat took part in his last parade. Horse Virat came to Rashtrapati Bhavan in 2003 and used to lead the parade every time on Republic Day as Commandant Charger. Even when a foreign head of state was welcomed in Rashtrapati Bhavan, Virat used to play this role. This year, on Army Day, horse Virat was also given COAS Commendation Card by the Army Chief. In view of Virat’s immense services, after his retirement he was given farewell in an equally grand manner.
My dear countrymen, when there is a sincere effort, work is done with a noble intention, results also follow. A great example of this has emerged from Assam. As soon as the name of Assam is taken, the thought of tea plantation and many national parks come to mind. Along with this, the picture of one horned rhinoceros i.e. one horn rhino also emerges in our mind. You all know that the one horned rhinoceros has always been a part of Assamese culture. This song of Bharat Ratna Bhupen Hazarika ji will resonate in every ear.
Friends, the meaning of this song is very relevant. This song says, the lush green surroundings of Kaziranga, the abode of elephants and tigers, the Earth watches one horned rhinoceros and listens to the melodious chirping of birds. The images of the rhinoceros are also seen in the Moonga and Eri dresses woven on the world famous handlooms of Assam. The rhinoceros, which has such great glory in the culture of Assam, also had to face difficulties. In 2013, 37 and in 2014, 32 rhinos were killed by poachers. To tackle this challenge, a huge campaign against the poaching of rhinoceros was launched in the last seven years with the special efforts of the Assam government. On the 22nd of September last year, on the occasion of World Rhino Day, more than 2400 horns seized from smugglers were burnt. This was a stern message to the poachers. The result of such efforts is that now there is a steady decrease in the hunting of rhinos in Assam. Where 37 rhinos were killed in 2013, 2 killings in 2020 and only 1 in 2021 have come to the fore. I appreciate the resolve of the people of Assam to save the rhinoceros.
Friends, the diverse colours and spiritual strength of Indian culture have always attracted people from all over the world. If I tell you that Indian culture is very popular in America, Canada, Dubai, Singapore, Western Europe and Japan, you will find this very common; you will not be surprised. But, if I say that Indian culture has a big attraction in Latin America and South America too, you will definitely think once. Whether it is a matter of promoting Khadi in Mexico or an attempt to popularize Indian traditions in Brazil, we have discussed these topics earlier in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Today I will tell you about the Indian culture making its mark in Argentina. Our culture is very much liked in Argentina. In 2018, during my visit to Argentina, I participated in a yoga program – ‘Yoga for Peace’. There is an organization in Argentina – Hastinapur Foundation. You will be surprised to hear… whither Argentina… and Hastinapur Foundation there too! This foundation is involved in the propagation of Indian Vedic traditions in Argentina. It was founded 40 years ago by a lady, Professor Aida Albrecht. Professor Aida Albrecht is going to turn 90 today. How her association with India happened is also very interesting. When she was 18 years old, she was first introduced to the power of Indian culture. She also spent a lot of time in India. She studied about Bhagavad Gita and Upanishads in depth. Today the Hastinapur Foundation has more than 40,000 members and about 30 branches in Argentina and other Latin American countries. Hastinapur Foundation has also published more than 100 Vedic and philosophical texts in Spanish language. Her ashram is also very enchanting. Twelve temples have been built in the ashram, in which there are idols of many Gods and Goddesses. There is also a temple at the center of all this which has been built for Advaitwadi Dhyan.
Friends, hundreds of such examples prove that our culture is a priceless heritage not only for us, but for the whole world. People all over the world want to know it, want to understand it, and want to live it. We should also try to make our cultural heritage a part of our life with full responsibility and try to take it to all the people.
My dear countrymen, I now want to ask a question to you and especially to our youth. Now imagine how many push-ups you can do at once. What I am about to tell you will surely fill you with wonder? Thounaojam Niranjoy Singh, a 24-year-old youth in Manipur, has made a record of 109 push-ups in a minute. Breaking the record is nothing new for Niranjoy Singh, earlier also, he had held the record for most Knuckle push-ups with one hand in a minute. I am sure you will be inspired by Niranjoy Singh and make physical fitness a part of your life.
Friends, today I want to share with you one such information about Ladakh which you will definitely be proud to know about. Ladakh will soon be blessed with an impressive Open Synthetic Track and Astro Turf Football Stadium. This stadium is being built at a height of more than 10,000 feet and its construction is going to be completed soon. This will be the largest open stadium in Ladakh where 30,000 spectators can sit together. This modern football stadium in Ladakh will also have a synthetic track with 8 lanes. Apart from this, there will also be a hostel facility with one thousand beds. You will also like to know that this stadium has also been certified by FIFA, the biggest organization of football. Whenever such a big sports infrastructure comes up, it brings great opportunities to the youth of the country. Alongwith such an arrangement, movement of people from all over the country takes place, tourism gets promoted and many employment opportunities are created. The stadium will also benefit many of our youth in Ladakh.
My dear countrymen, this time also in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we touched upon many topics. There is one more topic, which is on everyone’s mind at this time and that is of Corona. India is fighting with great success with the new wave of corona, it is also a matter of pride that till now about four and a half crore children have been administered the dose of Corona Vaccine. This means that about 60% of youth in the age group of 15 to 18 years have got their vaccines within three to four weeks. This will not only protect our youth but will also help them to continue with their studies. Another good thing is that within 20 days, one crore people have taken the precaution dose as well. This trust of our countrymen on the indigenous vaccine is our great strength. Now the cases of corona infection have also started decreasing – this is a very positive sign. People should be safe, the pace of economic activities of the country should be maintained – this is the wish of every countryman. And you already know, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, there are certain things, I cannot stay without mentioning… like, we should not forget the’Swachhta Abhiyan’ ; we should accelerate the campaign against single use plastic; Vocal for Local mantra is our responsibility, we have to work wholeheartedly for the Atma Nirbhar Bharat campaign. With the efforts of all of us, the country will reach new heights of development. With this wish, I bid you farewell. Thank you very much


86. FEBRUARY 27, 2022
My dear countrymen, Namaskar!
Welcome to ‘Mann Ki Baat’ once again. Today we will commence ‘Mann Ki Baat’ mentioning India’s success. In the beginning of this month, India has been successful in bringing home an invaluable heritage of hers from Italy. This heritage is the over one thousand years old idol of Avalokiteshvara Padmapani. This idol was stolen a few years ago from Kundalpur temple, Devi Sthan of Gaya ji in Bihar. But after innumerable efforts, India has now got this idol back. Similarly, a few years ago the idol of Lord Anjaneyaar, Hanuman ji was stolen from Vellore in Tamil Nadu. This idol of Hanuman ji was also 600-700 years old. Earlier this month, we retrieved this in Australia; our Mission has received it.
Friends, in our history of thousands of years, idols, one better than the other were always being made in various parts of the country; it also comprised reverence, capability, skill and was full of varied diversity. And the history of each of our idols also depicts the influence of their respective times. Not only were they a wonderful artistic example of Indian sculpture; our faith was also connected with them. But, in the past, many idols were stolen and kept being taken out of India. Sometimes in this country, at times in another, these idols were sold… and for them they were just pieces of art. Neither did they have anything to do with their history, nor with reverence attached to them. It is our responsibility towards Mother India to bring home these idols. These idols embody a part of the soul of India; faith as well. They also have a cultural-historical significance. Realising this responsibility, India increased her efforts. And resultantly, it fostered a deterrent fear against the tendency to steal. The countries where these idols were stolen and taken away to, also started to feel now that it could also have immense significance in the diplomatic channel of soft power in relations with India. India’s feelings are associated with it; India’s reverence is attached as well, and, in a way, it creates a lot of strength in people-to-people relations as well. Just a few days ago you must have noted that the idol of Ma Annapurna Devi, which was stolen from Kashi, was also brought back. This is an example of the changing global outlook towards India. Till the year 2013, nearly 13 idols had been brought back to India. But, in the last seven years, India has successfully brought back more than 200 precious idols. Many countries such as America, Britain, Holland, France, Canada, Germany, Singapore have understood this sentiment of India and helped us to retrieve these idols. When I went to America in September last year, I came across a lot of very old idols and many artefacts of cultural importance there. Whenever any priceless heritage returns to the country, it is naturally a matter of great satisfaction for all of us….as an Indian, as one who has reverence for history and archaeology, one connected with faith and culture.
Friends, talking about Indian culture and our heritage, today I want to introduce you to two people in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. These days, two Tanzanian siblings, Kili Paul and his sister Nima, are in the news a lot on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram, and I’m sure you too, must have heard about them. They have a passion, a craze for Indian music and for this reason they are also very popular. Their technique of Lip Sync shows how hard they work at it. Recently, a video of him singing our National Anthem ‘Jana Gana Mana’ on the occasion of Republic Day went viral. A few days ago, he also paid a soulful tribute to Lata didi by presenting her song. I really appreciate these two siblings Kili and Nima very much for their wonderful creativity. A few days ago, he has also been honoured at the Indian Embassy in Tanzania. The magic of Indian music is such that it fascinates everyone. I recall, a few years ago, singers-musicians from more than one hundred and fifty countries of the world, in their respective countries, in their respective costumes, made a successful presentation of ‘Vaishnav Jan’, the beloved bhajan of revered Bapu, the favourite composition of Mahatma Gandhi.
Today, when India is celebrating the important festival of 75th year of its Independence, similar initiatives can be carried out regarding patriotic songs, wherein foreign nationals or famous singers from abroad are invited to render Indian patriotic songs. Not only this, if Kili and Neema in Tanzania can lip sync the songs of India in this manner, aren’t there many types of songs in my country… in many languages ​​​​of our country… can’t any Gujarati children do that with Tamil songs….some children of Kerala could do that with Assamese songs…. some Kannada children could that with songs of Jammu and Kashmir! We can create such an environment in which we will be able to experience ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’. Not only this, we can definitely celebrate Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav in a novel way. I urge the youth of the country to make videos of the popular songs of Indian languages ​​in their own way…. you will become very popular! And the diversity of the country will be introduced to the new generation.
My dear countrymen, just a few days ago, we celebrated International Mother Language Day. Those who are learned can give a lot of academic input about where the word mother tongue came from, how it originated. I would emphasise about mother tongue that as our mother moulds our life, in the same manner, mother tongue also shapes our life. The mother and mother tongue, both together strengthen the foundation of life; lending it permanence. Just like we cannot abandon our mother, similarly, we cannot leave our mother tongue either. I remember an incident of yesteryears, when I had gone to America, I would get a chance to visit different families. Once I went to a Telugu family and I got to see a very happy scenario there. They told me that they had made a rule in the family that no matter how busy one were to be, if they were not outstation, then all the family members would have dinner sitting at the table together and equally compulsory on the dinner table was conversing in Telugu language only. This was also the rule for the children who were born there. Seeing this love for the mother tongue, I was highly impressed by this family.
Friends, even after 75 years of independence, some people are facing a mental dilemma due to which they have reservations with regard to their language, their dress, their food and drink, whereas, it is not like this anywhere else in the world. It is our mother tongue; we should speak it with pride. And, our India is so rich in terms of languages ​​that it just cannot be compared. The biggest beauty of our languages ​​is that from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, from Kutch to Kohima, hundreds of languages, thousands of dialects which are different from each other but are mutually integrated…many languages – one expression. For centuries, our languages have been evolving whilst learning from each other and ​​have been refining themselves, developing each other. The world’s oldest language Tamil is in India and every Indian should be proud that we have such a significant heritage of the world. In the same way, many ancient scriptures are also there; their expression too is in our Sanskrit language. The people of India are proud to be associated with 121 forms of mother tongues and 14 of these languages ​​are spoken by more than 1 crore people in everyday life. That is, many European countries do not have a total population than the people who are associated with 14 different languages ​​in our country. In the year 2019, Hindi was ranked third among the most spoken languages ​​of the world. Every Indian should be proud of this too. Language is not just a medium of expression, but also serves to preserve the culture and heritage of the society. Surjan Parohi ji is doing similar work in Suriname to save the heritage of his language. He turned 84 on the 2nd of this month. His forefathers also went to Suriname years ago, along with thousands of workers, to earn a living. Surjan Parohi ji writes very good poetry in Hindi; his name is considered among the national poets there. That is, even today Hindustan beats in his heart; there is a fragrance of the soil of India in his works. The people of Suriname have also built a museum in the name of Surjan Parohi ji. It is very heartening for me that in the year 2015 I had the opportunity to honour him.
Friends, today, that is, 27th February is also Marathi Bhasha Gaurav Divas.
“सर्व मराठी बंधु भगिनिना मराठी भाषा दिनाच्या हार्दिक शुभेच्छा|”
This day is dedicated to Marathi Kaviraj, Vishnu Vaman Shirvadkar ji, Shriman Kusumagraj ji. Today is also the birth anniversary of Kusumagraj ji. Kusumagraj ji wrote poems in Marathi, wrote many plays, and took Marathi literature to new heights.
Friends, our languages have their own special characteristics; mother tongue has its own science. For understanding this science, emphasis has been laid on studies in the local language in the National Education Policy. Efforts are being made that our professional courses should also be taught in the regional languages. In Azadi Ka Amrit Kaal, we all should lend momentum to this effort together; this is a work indicative of self-respect. I would like you to know about the qualities of whatever mother tongue you speak and write something in it.
Friends, A few days ago I had a meeting with my friend and former Prime Minister of Kenya, Raila Odinga. This meeting was interesting but also very emotional. Since we are very good friends, we also discuss freely. While both of us were in a conversation, Odinga ji told about his daughter. His daughter Rosemary had a brain tumour and because of this she had to undergo surgery. However, one side-effect of this was that Rosemary almost lost her eyesight; she stopped seeing. You can imagine what must have happened to the daughter…. and we can also guess the condition of the father, we can understand his feelings. In hospitals all over the world… there was not any major country in the world, where he had not tried his best for the treatment of his daughter. He searched the big countries of the world, but, there was no success and in a way, giving up all hopes, there was an atmosphere of despair in the entire household. Meanwhile, someone suggested him to come to India for Ayurveda treatment and even though he had tried a lot and was tired, yet he thought that let’s try once again… see what happens! He came to India, started getting his daughter treated at an Ayurvedic hospital in Kerala. The daughter stayed here for a long time. The effect of this Ayurvedic treatment was such that Rosemary’s eyesight returned to a great extent. You can imagine, as if a new lease of life was given and light came back into Rosemary’s life. As the new light has come in the whole family, Odinga ji was so emotional while telling me this and that he wishes, that the knowledge and science of Ayurveda of India, should be brought to Kenya. The type of plants that are used in it will be cultivated by them and he will do his best to get more people to benefit from it.
It is a matter of great happiness for me that from our land and our tradition have alleviated such a great suffering from someone’s life. You will also be happy to hear this. Which Indian would not be proud of it? We all know that not only Odinga ji but lakhs of people across the world are reaping similar benefits from Ayurveda.
Prince Charles from Britain is also one of the big admirers of Ayurveda. Whenever I meet him, he definitely mentions Ayurveda. He is also aware of many Ayurvedic institutions of India.
Friends, in the last seven years a lot of attention has been paid to the promotion of Ayurveda in the country. The formation of the Ministry of AYUSH has further strengthened our resolve to popularise our traditional methods of medicine and health. I am very happy that in the last few years many new start-ups have emerged in the field of Ayurveda. The AYUSH Start-up Challenge started earlier this month. The goal of this challenge is to identify and support the start-ups working in this field. I urge the youth working in this field, that they should take part in this challenge.
Friends, once people are determined to do something together, they do wonderful things. There have been many such big changes in the society, in which public participation, collective effort, has played a significant role. One such mass movement named “Mission Jal Thal” is underway in Srinagar, Kashmir. This is a unique effort to clean the lakes and ponds of Srinagar and restore their old glory. The focus of “Mission Jal Thal” is on “Kushal Saar” and “Gil Saar”. Along with public participation, a lot of help of technology is also being taken in this. To find out where there has been encroachment, where illegal construction has taken place, a formal survey of this area was carried out. Along with this, a campaign to remove plastic waste and clean up the waste was also launched. In the second phase of the mission, a lot of effort was also made to restore the old water channels and 19 springs filling the lake. In order to spread more and more awareness about the importance of this Restoration Project, local people and youth were also made Water Ambassadors. Now the local people here are also taking efforts for increasing the number of migratory birds and fish in “Gil Saar Lake” and are also happy to see it. My heartiest congratulations to the people of Srinagar for this wonderful effort.
Friends, the ‘Clean India Mission’ started by the country eight years ago, with the passage of time, it expanded manifold… new innovations were also added. Wherever you go in India, you will find that some effort is being made for cleanliness everywhere. I have come to know about one such attempt in Kokrajhar, Assam. Here a group of morning walkers have taken a very commendable initiative under the ‘Clean and Green Kokrajhar’ mission. All of them gave a motivational message of cleanliness by cleaning the three kilometre long road in the new flyover area. Similarly, under the ‘Clean India Campaign’ in Visakhapatnam, cloth bags are being promoted instead of polythene. People here are also campaigning against Single Use Plastic products to keep the environment clean. Along with this, these people are also spreading awareness to segregate the waste at home. The students of Somaiya College in Mumbai have also included beautification in their campaign of cleanliness. They have decorated the walls of Kalyan railway station with beautiful paintings. An inspiring example from Sawai Madhopur in Rajasthan has also come to my notice. The youth here have started a campaign named ‘Mission Beat Plastic’ in Ranthambore, in which plastic and polythene have been removed from the forests of Ranthambore. This spirit of Sabka Prayas, everyone’s effort strengthens public participation in the country and when there is public participation, even the biggest goals are definitely met.
My dear countrymen, just a few days from today, International Women’s Day will be celebrated all over the world on 8th of March. We have been sharing many examples related to the courage, skill, and talent of women in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Today, whether it is Skill India, Self Help Group, small or big industries, women have taken the lead everywhere. Wherever you see, women are dispelling old myths. Today, in our country, From Parliament to Panchayat, women are reaching newer heights in different fields. In the Army too, daughters are now playing responsibilities in new and bigger roles and are protecting the country. Last month on Republic Day we saw that daughters were flying modern fighter planes too. The country also lifted the restrictions on the admission of daughters in Sainik Schools, and daughters are taking admission in Sainik Schools all over the country. Similarly, look at the start-up world, in the recent years, thousands of new start-ups began in the country. About half of these start-ups have women in director roles. In the recent past, decisions like increasing maternity leave for women have been taken. The country is trying to give equal rights to sons and daughters by fixing a common age for marriage. Due to this, the participation of women is increasing in every field. You must be noticing another major change happening in the country. This change is the success of our social campaigns. Take the success of ‘Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao’… today the sex ratio in the country has improved. The number of girls going to school has also improved. In this we also have a responsibility that our daughters do not drop out of school. Similarly, women in the country have got freedom from open defecation under the ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’. A social evil like triple talaq is also coming to an end. Ever since the law against triple talaq has come into being, there has been a reduction of 80 percent in triple talaq cases in the country. How are all these changes happening in such a short span of time? This change is coming because women themselves are now leading the change and progressive efforts in our country.
My dear countrymen, tomorrow the 28th of February is ‘National Science Day’. This day is also known for the discovery of Raman Effect. Along with CV Raman ji, I pay my respectful tribute to all the scientists who have contributed significantly in enriching our scientific journey. Friends, technology has secured an important place in our lives in the realm of ease and simplicity. Which technology is good and what is the better use of that technology, we are well acquainted with all these subjects. But, it is also true that the basis of that technology, the underlying science is something that we neglect in conveying to the children of our family. On this Science Day, I urge all the families to definitely start with small efforts to develop a scientific temperament in their children.
Now, for example – poor vision… after wearing glasses, vision improves with clarity… children can easily be explained on the science behind it. It’s not that one should restrict oneself to just looking at the glasses and enjoying. Now you can simply explain to the child on a small piece of paper. Now the child uses a mobile phone…how does a calculator work, how does a remote control work, what are sensors? Along with this, are such scientific elements also discussed in the house? Maybe we can easily explain these things behind the everyday functioning of the household, what is the inherent science behind a phenomenon. In the same way, have we ever indulged in stargazing together with the children? There must have been conversations about stars in the night. Different constellations appear, tell them about them. By doing this you can create a new interest in children towards physics and astronomy. Nowadays, there are also many apps through which you can locate the stars and planets, or, you can identify the star which is visible in the sky and can also know about it. I will also tell our start-ups that you should employ your skills and scientific character in the work related to nation-building. This is also our Collective Scientific Responsibility towards the country. Like, nowadays I see that our start-ups are doing very well in the world of virtual reality. In this era of virtual classes, one such virtual lab can be designed keeping children in mind. We can also make children experience a chemistry lab sitting at home through virtual reality. My request to my teachers and parents is to encourage all the students and children to ask questions and together with them find the right answers to those questions. Today, I would also like to appreciate the role of Indian scientists in the fight against Corona. Due to their hard work, it was possible to manufacture the Made In India vaccine, which has helped the whole world a lot. This is the gift of science to humanity.
My dear countrymen, this time too we discussed many subjects. Many festivals are lined up in the coming month of March… Shivratri… A few days later we will all will start preparing for Holi. Holi is a festival that unites us all. In this festival, all differences between near-dear ones and strangers, big and small, rancour and envy disappear. That is why it is said that the colours of love and harmony are thicker than the colours of Holi. Along with Gujiya in Holi, there is a unique sweetness of relationships as well. We have to strengthen these bonds further, and relations are not only with the people of our family but also with the people who are part of your larger family. You have to remember the most important way to do so. This is the way of celebrating the festival through ‘Vocal for Local’. You should buy local products on festivals, so that the lives of the people living around you also become colourful and vibrant. The success with which our country is fighting the battle against Corona and moving forward is imparting enthusiasm to the festivals manifold. With this very zeal, we have to celebrate our festivals, and at the same time, we have to maintain our caution. I wish you all a very Happy festival season. I will always be waiting for your words, your letters and your messages.
Thank you very much!


87. MARCH 27,  2022
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar! Last week we achieved a feat that filled all of us with pride. You must have heard that last week, India has achieved the export target of $ 400 billion, i.e. 30 lakh crore rupees. At first instance, it might come across as a matter related to the economy; but more than the economy, it is related to the capability of India, the potential of India. At one time, the figure of exports from India used to be 100 billion, at times 150 billion, sometimes 200 billion…today, India has reached 400 billion dollars. In a way, this means that the demand for items made in India is increasing all over the world; the other meaning is that the supply chain of India is getting stronger by the day… and it also has a very big message. The nation takes great strides when resolves are bigger than dreams. When there is a sincere effort day and night for the resolves, those resolutions also attain fruition… and you see, the same happens in a person’s life as well. When one’s resolve, one’s efforts, become bigger than one’s dreams, success comes to the person on its own.
Friends,
new, ever new products from all corners of the country are reaching foreign shores. Leather products from Hailakandi in Assam or handloom products from Osmanabad, fruits and vegetables from Bijapur or black rice from Chandauli, the exports of all of these are increasing. Now, you will also find the world famous apricot of Ladakh in Dubai too and in Saudi Arabia, you will find bananas shipped from Tamil Nadu. Most importantly, an array of new products are being sent to ever newer countries. For example, the first consignment of millets grown in Himachal and Uttarakhand was exported to Denmark. Bainganapalli and Subarnarekha mangoes from Krishna and Chittoor districts of Andhra Pradesh were exported to South Korea. Fresh jackfruits from Tripura were exported to London by air and for the first time King Chilli from Nagaland was dispatched to London. Similarly, the first consignment of Bhalia wheat was exported from Gujarat to Kenya and Sri Lanka. This means, now if you go to other countries, Made in India products will be more visible than ever before.
Friends,
this list is very long and the power of Make In India is equivalent in might to the extent of the list. Equally great is the potential of India… and the basis of its strength are our farmers, artisans, our weavers, engineers, our small entrepreneurs, the MSME sector; people from many different professions, all of them are its true strength. It is only due to their hard work, that the goal of exporting to the tune of $ 400 billion has been achieved and I am happy that this power of the people of India is now reaching new markets in every nook and corner of the world. When each and every Indian is vocal for local, it does not take long for the local to become global. Let’s make the local ‘global’ and augment the prestige of our products further.
Friends,
the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ will love to know that the success of our small entrepreneurs at the domestic level also makes us proud. Today our small entrepreneurs are playing a major partnership role in government procurement through Government e-Market place i.e. GeM. A much transparent system has been developed through technology. During the last one year through the GeM portal, the government has purchased items worth more than one lakh crore rupees. Close to 1.25 lakh small entrepreneurs, small shopkeepers from every corner of the country have sold their goods directly to the government. There was a time when only big companies could sell goods to the government. However, the country is changing now; the old systems are also changing. Now even the smallest of shopkeepers can sell one’s goods to the government on the GeM Portal – this is the New India. She not only dreams big, but also shows the courage to reach that goal, where no one has reached before. On the basis of this very courage, all of us Indians together will definitely fulfill the dream of an Aatmanirbhar Bharat, a self-reliant India.
My dear countrymen,
you must have observed Baba Sivanand ji in the recently held Padma Awards ceremony. Seeing the agility of the 126-year-old, everyone must have been surprised just like I was…and I saw, before one could bat an eyelid, he started bowing in the Nandi Mudra. I bowed a number of times and offered Pranaam to Baba Sivanand ji. Both, the age of 126 years and the fitness of Baba Sivanand are the subject of discussion in the country today. I read many people’s comments on social media, that Baba Sivanand is fitter than those one-fourth his age. Indeed, the life of Baba Sivananda is an inspiration for all of us. I wish him a long life. He has a passion for yoga and leads a very healthy lifestyle.
जीवेम शरदः शतम् |
In our culture, everyone is wished a hundred years of healthy life. We will celebrate ‘World Health Day’ on the 7th of April. Today, the collective Indian thought on health, whether it is Yoga or Ayurveda, is increasingly trending all over the world. Just last week you must have noticed a Yoga program being organized in Qatar. In this, citizens of 114 countries participated and made a new world record. Similarly, the market of the Ayush Industry is also increasing continuously. 6 years ago, the market for medicines related to Ayurveda was around 22 thousand crores. Today, the Ayush Manufacturing Industry is reaching around one lakh forty thousand crore rupees, that is, the possibilities are increasing continuously in this sector. In the start-up world too, AYUSH is becoming a subject of attraction.
Friends,
I have often referred to earlier on other start-ups of the health sector, but this time I will talk to you especially on Ayush Start-Ups. There is a start-up Kapiva! Its meaning is hidden in its name. Here, Ka means – Kapha, Pi means – Pitta and Va means – Vaata. This Start-Up is based on healthy eating habits in accordance with our traditions. Nirog-Street too is another start-up which is a unique concept in the Ayurveda Healthcare Ecosystem. Its technology-driven platform connects Ayurveda Doctors from across the world directly to the people. More than 50 thousand practitioners are associated with it. Similarly, Atreya Innovations, a healthcare technology start-up, is working in the field of Holistic Wellness. Ixoreal has not only spread awareness about the use of Ashwagandha, but has also invested a huge amount on top-quality production process. Cureveda has created dietary supplements for Holistic Life through the confluence of modern herbal research and traditional knowledge.
Friends,
I have listed only a few names so far; this list is very long. It is a symbol of the young entrepreneurs of India and the new possibilities being created in India. I also have a request for the Start-Ups of the Health Sector and especially the Ayush Start-Ups. Whatever portal you design online; whatever content you create, try to make it in all the languages ​​​​recognized by the United Nations. There are many such countries in the world where English is neither spoken nor understood much. Promote your information keeping such countries in mind as well. I am sure that soon, Ayush Start-Ups from India with better quality products will reign all over the world.
Friends,
health is also directly related to cleanliness. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we always mention the efforts of the proponents of cleanliness. One such Swachhagrahi is Chandrakishore Patil ji. He lives in Nashik, Maharashtra. Chandrakishore ji’s resolve regarding cleanliness is very heartfelt. He stands by the Godavari river, and constantly encourages people not to throw garbage in the river. If he sees someone doing this, he immediately stops them. Chandrakishore ji invests a lot of his time in this endeavour. By evening, he has a pile of such things, which people have brought to throw into the river. This effort of Chandrakishore ji also raises awareness and is also inspiring. Similarly, there is another Swachhagrahi – Rahul Maharana of Puri in Orissa. Rahul goes to the pilgrimage sites in Puri early in the morning every Sunday, and clears the plastic garbage there. He has cleaned hundreds of kilos of plastic garbage and dirt so far. Be it Rahul of Puri or Chandrakishore of Nashik, they teach us a lot. As citizens, we must carry out our duties, whether it is cleanliness, nutrition or vaccination… all these efforts also help us in staying healthy.
My dear countrymen,
let’s talk about Mupattam Sri Narayanan ji of Kerala. He has started a project named – ‘Pots for water of life’. When you come to know about this project, you will marvel at the wonderful work done.
Friends,
Mupattam Sri Narayanan ji is running a campaign to distribute earthen pots so that animals and birds do not face water problems during summer. In summer, he used to get upset seeing the plight of animals and birds. Then he thought… why not start distributing earthen pots himself so that others were left with only the task of filling water in those pots. You will be surprised that the number of utensils distributed by Narayanan ji is going to cross one lakh. In his campaign, he will donate the hundred thousandth pot to the Sabarmati Ashram established by Gandhi ji. Today, when the summer season has knocked at our doors, this work of Narayanan will definitely inspire all of us and we will also make arrangements for water for our animal and bird friends this summer.
Friends,
I would also request the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to reiterate our resolves. Whatever we can do to save every drop of water, we must do that. Apart from this, we have to keep giving equal emphasis on recycling of water. The water used at home can be used in pots, can be used in gardening, it must be reused. With a little effort, you can make such arrangements in your home. Centuries ago, Rahimdas ji had purposefull said ‘Rahiman paani raakhiye, bin paani sab soon’. And in this task of saving water, I have high hopes from children. Just as our children made cleanliness a movement, they can help save water by becoming a ‘Water Warriors’.
Friends,
for centuries, water conservation in our country; protection of water sources has been part of the nature of society. I am happy that many people in the country have made water conservation a life mission. Like Arun Krishnamurthy is a friend from Chennai! Arun ji is running a campaign to clean the ponds and lakes in his area. He took up the responsibility of cleaning more than 150 ponds and lakes and successfully completed it. Similarly, there is a friend from Maharashtra, Rohan Kale. Rohan is an HR Professional. He is running a campaign to preserve hundreds of step wells in Maharashtra. Many of these wells are centuries old and are part of our heritage. Bansilal-Pet Kuan in Secunderabad is one such step well. Due to years of neglect, this step well got filled with mud and garbage. But now the campaign to revive this step well has started with public participation.
Friends,
I hail from a state where there has always been a shortage of water. These step wells are called Vav in Gujarat. Vav has played a big role in a state like Gujarat. The ‘Jal Mandir Scheme’ played a significant role in the protection of these wells or step wells. Several step wells were revived all over Gujarat. This also helped a lot in raising the water level in these areas. You can also run similar campaigns at the local level. Be it the construction of Check dams or Rain Water Harvesting, individual efforts are also important in this and collective efforts are necessary too. For instance, at least 75 Amrit Sarovars can be made in every district of our country in the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav. Some old lakes can be rejuvenated; some new ones can be dug. I am sure you will definitely make some effort in this direction.
My dear countrymen,
one of the beautiful aspects of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is that I get your messages in many languages, in many dialects. Many people also send audio message on MYGOV. India’s culture, our languages, our dialects, our way of life, our culinary range, all of this diversity is our great strength. From east to west, from north to south, this diversity binds India together, leading to Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat. Here too, both our historical sites and Pauranik literature contribute a lot. You must be wondering why I am mentioning this to you right now! The reason for this is the “Madhavpur Mela”. The listeners of Mann Ki Baat will find it very interesting to know where the Madhavpur Mela is held, why it is held, how it is related to the diversity of India.
Friends,
“Madhavpur Mela” is held in the village of Madhavpur near the sea at Porbandar in Gujarat. But it also connects with the eastern end of India. You must be thinking how this is possible! The answer to this also comes from a Pauranik story. It is said that thousands of years ago Lord Krishna was married to Rukmani, a princess from the North East. This marriage took place in Madhavpur, Porbandar and as a symbol of the that marriage, even today Madhavpur fair is held there. This deep relationship between the East and West is our heritage. With the passage of time with the efforts of the people, new aspects too are now being added to the Madhavpur fair. In local parlance, the bride’s side is called Gharati and now many Gharaatis from the North East have started coming to this fair. Artists from all the states of the North East reach the Madhavpur Fair, which lasts for a week; when artisans associated with handicrafts arrive and the beauty of the fair is enhanced manifold. For a week, this amalgamation of cultures of the East and West of India, the Madhavpur fair creates a very beautiful example of Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat. I request you to read and know more about this fair as well.
My dear countrymen,
the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav in the country is now becoming a new example of public participation. A few days ago, on the 23rd of March, many celebrations were held in different corners of the country on Martyrs’ Day. The country remembered te heroes and heroines of her Independence; remembered them reverently. On the same day I also got the opportunity to dedicate to the nation the Biplobi Bharat Gallery at Victoria Memorial, Kolkata. This is a very unique gallery to pay tribute to the brave revolutionaries of India. If you get n opportunity, you must certainly visit it. Friends, in the month of April we will also celebrate the birth anniversary of two great personalities. Both of them have left their deep impact on Indian society. These great personalities are – Mahatma Phule and Babasaheb Ambedkar. We will celebrate Mahatma Phule’s birth anniversary on the 11th of April and Babasaheb’s birth anniversary on the 14th of April. Both of these great men fought persistently against discrimination and inequality. Mahatma Phule opened schools for girls in that era; raised his voice against female infanticide. He also launched large campaigns to get rid of the water crisis.
Friends,
the mention of Savitribai Phule ji is equally important in this reference to Mahatma Phule. Savitribai Phule played a significant role in the formation of many social institutions. As a teacher and a social reformer, she also made the society aware and encouraged it. Together they founded the Satyashodhak Samaj…they made efforts for the empowerment of the people. We can clearly see the influence of Mahatma Phule in the work of Babasaheb Ambedkar. He also used to say that the development of any society can be assessed by looking at the status of women in that society. Taking inspiration from the life of Mahatma Phule, Savitribai Phule, Babasaheb Ambedkar, I request all the parents and guardians to ensure education for their daughters. In order to increase the enrollment of daughters in schools, the Kanya Shiksha Pravesh Utsav has also been started a few days ago… the focus is on bringing back to school those girls who missed their studies for some reason.
Friends,
it is a matter of good fortune for all of us that we have also got an opportunity to work for Panch Teerth associated with Babasaheb. Be it his birthplace in Mhow, Chaityabhoomi in Mumbai, his home in London, the Deeksha Bhoomi in Nagpur, or Babasaheb’s Maha-Parinirvana Sthal in Delhi, I have had the privilege of visiting all the places, all sacred sites. I would urge the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to visit the places associated with Mahatma Phule, Savitribai Phule and Babasaheb Ambedkar. You will get to learn a lot there.
My dear countrymen,
this time too in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we talked on many topics. Many festivals are lined up next month. Navratri is only a few days away. In Navratri, we practice fasting, perform sadhana of Shakti, worship Shakti…that is, our traditions teach us celebration and restraint as well. Sanyam and Tap are also a festival for us, which is why Navratri has always been very special for all of us. There is also the festival of Gudi Padwa on the very first day of Navratri. Easter also comes in April and the holy days of Ramadan are also starting. Let us celebrate our festivals by including everyone together, strenthening India’s diversity… this is our collective desire. That’s all this time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I will see you again next month with new topics.
Many many thanks !


88. APRIL 24, 2022
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
With new topics, with new inspirational examples, gathering new messages, I have come once again to express ‘Mann Ki Baat’ with you. Do you know about which topic I have received the maximum letters and messages this time? This subject is such that it is connected to past, present and future; all three. I am talking about the country’s new Pradhanmantri Sangrahalaya. On this 14th April, the birth anniversary of Babasaheb Ambedkar, the Pradhanmantri Sangrahalaya was dedicated to the nation. It has been opened for the citizens of the country. One such listener is Shrimaan Sarthak ji; Sarthak ji lives in Gurugram and has visited the Pradhanmantri Sangrahalaya at the very first opportunity. The message that Sarthak ji has written to me on Namo App is very interesting. He has written that for years he has been watching news channels, reading newspapers, along with being connected to social media, so he used to think that his general knowledge was good enough… but, when he visited the PM Museum, he was very surprised, he realized that he did not know much about his country and those who led the country. He has written about certain facets of the PM Museum which heightened his curiosity such as the spinning wheel of Lal Bahadur Shastri, gifted to him by his in-laws, that made Sarthak ji happy. He also saw Shastri ji’s passbook noticing how little savings he had. Sarthak ji has written that he did not even know that Morarji Bhai Desai was Deputy Collector in Gujarat before joining the freedom struggle.
He had a long career in the administrative service. On Chaudhary Charan Singh ji, Sarthak ji writes that he was unaware of Chaudhary Charan Singh ji’s great contribution in the field of zamindari abolition. Not just that, he further writes he saw that Mr. P.V. Narasimha Rao ji took a very keen interest in the work of Land Reform. Sarthak ji also came to know only after coming to this museum that Chandrashekhar ji had undertaken the historic Bharat Yatra, walking more than 4 thousand kilometers. In the museum, when he saw the items that Atalji used, listened to his speeches, he was filled with pride. Sarthak ji also mentioned that this museum also provides very interesting information about Mahatma Gandhi, Sardar Patel, Dr. Ambedkar, Jai Prakash Narayan and our Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.
Friends, what can be a better time to remember the contribution of the Prime Ministers of the country than the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav? It is a matter of pride for the country that the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav is taking the form of a mass movement. People’s interest in history is increasing a lot and in such a situation the PM Museum is also becoming a centre of attraction for the youth, connecting them with the precious heritage of the country.
By the way, friends, when so much is being discussed with you about the museum, I felt that I should also ask you some questions. Let’s see what your general knowledge says… how much information you have! Are you ready, my young friends, are you readywith your paper and pen? What I am going to ask you right now, you can share the answers on NaMo App or social media with #MuseumQuiz… and do share. I urge you to answer all these questions. This will enhance interest in the museum among people all over the country. Do you know in which city of the country there is a famous Rail Museum where people have been getting a chance to see the heritage of Indian Railways for the last 45 years? Let me give you another clue. You can also find here,from the Fairy Queen, the Saloon of Prince of Wales to the Fireless Steam Locomotive. Do you know which museum is there in Mumbai, where we get to see the evolution of currency in a very interesting way? Here coins of the sixth century BC are present; on the other hand, e-Money is also present. The third question –  ‘Virasat-e-Khalsa’ is related to this museum. Do you know, in which city of Punjab is this museum located? All of you must be enjoying a lot in kite flying; the next question is related to this. Where is the country’s one and only Kite Museum? Let me give you a clue, the biggest kite displayed here is 22 by 16 feet in size. Did something come to mind –No?Let me tell you one more thing here – the city in which it is located has a special connection with Bapu. Who does not have the hobby of collecting postage stamps in childhood! But, do you know where the National Museum related to postage stamps is in India? I ask you one more question. Which museum is housed in a building named Gulshan Mahal? The clue for you is that in this museum you can also become the director of a film, you can also see the nuances of camera, editing. Ok,do you know of any museum that celebrates India’s textile heritage? This museum has miniature paintings, Jaina manuscripts, sculptures -…many more. It is also known for its unique display.
Friends, in this era of technology, it is very easy for you to find answers to these. I asked these questions so that the curiosity in our new generation rises… they read more about them;go and visit them. Now, because of the importance of museums, many people themselves are coming forward and donating a lot to the museums. Many people are donating their old collections, as well as historical artefacts, to museums. When you do this, in a way, you share a cultural treasure with the entire society. In India too, people are now coming forward for this. I also appreciate all such individual efforts. Today, in the changing times and due to the covid protocols, emphasis is being placed on adopting new methods in museums. The focus has also increased on digitization in museums. You must be aware that on the 18th of MayInternational Museum Day will be celebrated all over the world. In view of this, I have an idea for my young friends. Why not visit a local museum with your circle of friends during the upcoming holidays. Do share your experience with #MuseumMemories. By doing so you will also awaken curiosity about museums in the minds of others.
My dear countrymen, you must be taking many resolves in your life, and be you must be working hard to fulfill them. Friends, recently, I came to know about such a resolve, which was really different, very unique. That’s why I thought that I must share it with the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Friends, can you imagine that someone could come out of one’s house with a resolve that one would roam the whole city for the whole day without doing any money transaction in cash – isn’t this an interesting resolve. Two daughters of Delhi, Sagarika and Preksha, experimented with Cashless Day Outlike this. Wherever Sagarika and Preksha went in Delhi, they got the facility of digital payment. Because of the UPI QR code, they did not have to withdraw cash. Even at most of the street food and roadside vendors they got the facility of online transaction.
Friends, one may  think that it is Delhi, a metro city, it is easy to have all this here. But now it is not the case that this spread of UPI is limited only to big cities like Delhi. I have also received a message from Anandita Tripathi from Ghaziabad. Anandita had gone to the North East with her husband last week. She narrated me the experience of her journey from Assam to Meghalaya and Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh. You will also be pleasantly surprised to know that in this journey of spanning several days, they did not need to withdraw cash even in remote areas. In places where there was no good internet facility till a few years ago, now there is also the facility of payment through UPI. Looking at the experiences of Sagarika, Preksha and Anandita, I would also urge you to try the experiment of Cashless Day Out, definitely do it.
Friends, in the last few years, BHIM UPI has rapidly become a part of our economy and habits. Now, even in small towns and in most villages people are transacting through UPI itself. A culture is also evolving in the country throughS Digital Economy. In the small street shops digital paymenthas made it easy to serve more and more customers. Now they don’t even have a problem of loose change. You must also feel the convenience of UPI in everyday life. Wherever you go… carrying cash, going to the bank, finding an ATM… the hassle is now over. All payments are made from mobile itself, but, have you ever thought that how big a digital economy has been created in the country due to these small online payments of yours. At present, transactions worth about 20 thousand crore rupees are taking place in our country every day. Last March, UPI transactions reached around Rs 10 lakh crores. Due to this, convenience is also increasing in the country and an atmosphere of honesty is also being created. Now many new start-ups related to Fin-tech are also coming up in the country. I would like you to share any experiences related to this power of digital payment and start-up ecosystem. Your experiences can become an inspiration to many other countrymen.
My dear countrymen, how the power of technology is changing the lives of ordinary people, we are constantly seeing this around us. Technology has done another great job. It has served to bring the benefit of the extraordinary abilities of the Divyang friends  to the country and the world. At the Tokyo Paralympics we have seen what our Divyang brothers and sisters can achieve. Just like in sports, in arts, academics and many other fields, Divyang friends are doing wonders, but when these friends get the power of technology, they achieve even greater heights. That is why, the country is constantly making efforts to make the resources and infrastructure accessible to the differently-abled. There are also many start-ups and organizations in the country which are doing inspirational work in this direction. There is one such organization – Voice of Specially Abled People, this organization is promoting new opportunities in the field of assistive technology. An innovative beginning has also been made to take the work of Divyang artists to the world. Voice of Specially Abled People has prepared a digital art gallery of paintings of these artists. How Divyang friends are rich in extraordinary talents and what extraordinary abilities they have – this art gallery is an example of that. What are the challenges in the life of Divyang friends, how far can they reach after overcoming them?You can feel many such facets in these paintings. If you also know a Divyang friend, know their talent, then with the help of digital technology, you can bring them to the fore in front of the world. Divyang friends must also join such endeavours.
My dear countrymen, summer heat is increasing very fast in most parts of the country. This rising heat equally increases our responsibility to save water. It is possible that there may be plenty of water available where you are now. But, you also have to always remember the crores of people who live in water-stressed areas, for whom every drop of water is like elixir.
Friends, at this time in the 75th year of independence, in the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, water conservation is one of the resolves with which the country is moving forward. During the Amrit Mahotsav, 75 Amrit Sarovars will be built in every district of the country. You can imagine how big the campaign is. The day is not far when there will be 75 Amrit Sarovars in your own city. I would like all of you, and especially the youth, to know about this campaign and also bear responsibility for it. If there is any history related to freedom struggle in your area, if there is a memory of a freedom fighter, you can also connect it with Amrit Sarovar. By the way, I like to learnthat after taking the resolve of Amrit Sarovar, work has started on it at many places at a rapid pace. I have come to know about Gram Panchayat Patwai of Rampur in UP. There was a pond on the land of the Gram Sabha, but it was full of filth and heaps of garbage. With a lot of hard work, with the help of local people, with the help of local school children, that dirty pond has been transformed in the last few weeks. Now, many arrangements have been made on the banks of that lake like retaining wall, boundary wall, food court, fountains and lighting. I congratulate the Patwai Gram Panchayat of Rampur, the people of the village, the children there for this effort.
Friends, the availability of water and the scarcity of water, these determine the progress and speed of any country. You must have also noticed that in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I do talk about water conservation again and again along with topics like cleanliness. It is clearly stated in our scriptures –
Paniyam paramam loke, jeevaanaam jeevanam samritam ||
That is, in the world, water is the basis of life of every living being and water is also the biggest resource, that is why our ancestors gave so much emphasis on water conservation. From Vedas to Puranas, to save water everywhere, to build ponds, lakes etc., has been termed as the social and spiritual duty of a person. In Valmiki Ramayana, special emphasis has been laid on water conservation, on connecting water sources. Similarly, students of history would know, how much engineering was developed in India regarding water even during the Indus-Saraswati and Harappan civilizations. In ancient times, there was an interconnected system of water sources in many cities and this was the time, when the population was not that much, there was no shortage of natural resources, there was a kind of abundance, yet, about water conservation the awareness was very high then,. But, today the situation is reverse. I urge all of you to know about such old ponds, wells and lakes in your area. Due to the Amrit Sarovar Abhiyan, along with water conservation, a distinct identity of your area will also develop. With this, local tourist places will also be developed in cities, localities, people will also get a place to walk around.
Friends, every effort related to water is related to our tomorrow. It is the responsibility of the whole society. For this, different societies have madevarious efforts continuously for centuries. For example, ‘Maldhari’, a tribe of “Rann of Kutch” uses a method called “Vridas” for water conservation. Under this, small wells are built and trees and plants are planted nearby to protect it. Similarly, the Bhil tribe of Madhya Pradesh used their historical tradition “Halma” for water conservation. Under this tradition, the people of this tribe gather at one place to find a solution to the problems related to water. Due to the suggestions received from the Halma tradition, the water crisis in this area has reduced and the ground water level is also increasing.
Friends, if the same sense of duty comes in everyone’s mind, the biggest of challenges related to water crisis can be solved. Come, let us take a pledge to conserve water and save life in the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav of freedom. We will save water drop by drop and save every single life.
My dear countrymen, you must have seen that a few days ago I held ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’ with my young friends and students. During this discussion some students said that they are afraid of maths in the exam. A similar thought was also sent to me by many students in their messages. At that very moment I had decided that I would definitely discuss mathematics this time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Friends, Mathematics is such a subject about which we Indians should be most comfortable. After all, the people of India have given the most research and contribution to the whole world regarding mathematics. You must have heard a lot about zero, that is, the discovery of zero and its importance. Often you will also hear that if zero was not discovered, then perhaps we would not have been able to see so much scientific progress in the world. From Calculus to Computers – all these scientific inventions are based on Zero. Mathematicians and scholars of India have even written that –
यत किंचित वस्तु तत सर्वं, गणितेन बिना नहि !
That is, whatever is there in this entire universe, everything is based on mathematics. If you remember the study of science, you will understand its meaning. Every principle of science is expressed through a mathematical formula. Be it Newton’s laws, Einstein’s famous equation, all the science related to the universe is mathematics. Now scientists also discuss Theory of Everything, that is, a single formula that can express everything in the universe. Our sages have always imagined such an expansion of scientific understanding with the help of mathematics. If we invented zero, we have also expressed infinityas well. In common parlance, when we talk about numbers and numbers, we speak and think till million, billion and trillion, but, in Vedas and in Indian mathematics, this calculation goes much further. We have a very old verse here –
एकं दशं शतं चैव, सहस्रम् अयुतं तथा |
लक्षं च नियुतं चैव, कोटि: अर्बुदम् एव च ||
वृन्दं खर्वो निखर्व: च, शंख: पद्म: च सागर: |
अन्त्यं मध्यं परार्ध: च, दश वृद्ध्या यथा क्रमम् ||
The order of numbers is given in this verse. such as –
One, ten, hundred, thousand and ayut!
Lakh, Niyut and Koti i.e. crores.
Similarly this number goes up to the shankh, padma and saagar. One saagar means 10 to the power of 57. Not only this, there are numbers like Ogh and Mahog even after this. There is a Mahogha –10 to the power of 62, that is, 62 zeros next to one. Even if we imagine such a large number in the mind, it is difficult, but, in Indian mathematics, they have been used for thousands of years. Just a few days ago I met the CEO of Intel company. He had given me a painting, in which one such Indian method of calculation or measurement was depicted through Vamana avatar. With reference to the name Intel, the computer would have come automatically to your mind. You must have also heard about the binary system in the language of computer, butDo you know that in our country there were sages like Acharya Pingala, who postulated the binary. Similarly, from mathematicians Aryabhatta to  Ramanujan, there has been work on many principles of mathematics here.
Friends, Mathematics has never been a difficult subject for us Indians, a big reason for this is our Vedic Mathematics. The credit of Vedic mathematics in modern times goes to Shri Bharati Krishna Tirtha Ji Maharaj. He revived the ancient methods of calculation and named it Vedic Mathematics. The most important thing about Vedic Mathematics was that through it you can do even the most difficult calculations in your mind in the blink of an eye. You must have seen videos of many such youths learning and teaching Vedic maths on social media these days.
Friends, today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ a similar friend who teaches Vedic Mathematics is also joining us. This is Gaurav Tekriwal ji of Kolkata. And for the last two-and-a-half decades, he has been taking this movement of Vedic mathematics forward with great dedication. Come, let’s talk to him.
Modi ji – Gaurav ji Namaste!
Gaurav –Namaste sir!
Modi ji – I have heard that you are very interested in Vedic Maths; you do a lot. So, first I would like to know something about you and later, how you are interested in this subject, do tell me?
Gaurav – Sir, when I was applying for business school twenty years ago, it used to have a competitive exam called CAT. There were many maths questions in it, which had to be done in little time. So, my mother brought me a book called Vedic Mathematics. Swami Shri Bharatikrishna Tirtha Ji Maharaj had written that book. And in that he gave 16 sutras. In which mathematics used to be very simple and very fast. When I read that, I was very inspired and then my interest was awakened in Mathematics. I understood that this subject, which is a gift of India, which is our heritage, can be taken to every corner of the world. Since then I made it a mission to take Vedic Mathematics to every nook and corner of the world. Because the fear of mathematics haunts everyone. And what can be simpler than Vedic Mathematics!
Modi ji – Gaurav ji for how many years have you been working in this?
Gaurav –It has been almost 20 years sir. I am still at it.
Modi ji – And what do you do for awareness, what experiments do you use, how do you reach people?
Gaurav – We go to schools, we give online education. The name of our organization is Vedic Maths Forum India. Under that organization, we teach Vedic Maths 24 hours a day through the internet, Sir!
Modi ji – Gaurav ji, you know, I also like to interact with children constantly and I keep looking for opportunities. And with exam warrior, I have institutionalized it in a way and I have also experienced that when I talk to children, they run away as soon as they hear the name of maths. And so, my effort is that this fear which is without any reason should be removed, this fear should be removed withbasic techniques of mathematics which come from our traditions and which are not new to India.Perhaps, among the ancient traditions in the world India has a tradition of mathematics. Soif the exam warrior’s fear has to be dispelled, what will you advise them?
Gaurav – Sir, this is most useful for children, because, the fear of exams which has become a fobia in every home. Children take tuition for the exam, parents are worried. Teachers also get upset. So all this gets dissipates with Vedic maths. Vedic maths is fifteen hundred percent faster than this simple maths and it gives a lot of confidence in the children and the mind also runs faster. As such, we have also introduced Yoga with Vedic Mathematics. So that if the children want, they can calculate even with their eyes closed by the method of Vedic mathematics.
Modi ji – Even in the tradition of dhyan, doing mathematics in this way is also a primary course of meditation.
Gaurav – Right Sir!
Modi ji – Well Gaurav ji, it is very nice that you and I have taken up this work in mission mode and especially your mother took you on this path as a good guru. And today you are taking millions of children on that path. My best wishes to you
Gaurav – Thank you sir! I thank you sir! That you gave importance to Vedic maths and chose me sir! So we are very thankful.
Modi ji – Thank you very much. Namaskar.
Gaurav – Namaste sir.
Friends, Gaurav ji has very well explained how Vedic maths can transform mathematicsfrom complex to fun. Not only this, you can also solve big scientific problems with Vedic mathematics. I would like all parents to teach Vedic maths to their children. With this, their confidence will not only increase; the analytical power of their brain will also increase and yes, whatever little fear some children have about Mathematics, that phobia will also end completely.
My dear countrymen, today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, many informative topics from museum to maths were discussed. All these topics become part of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ only because of your suggestions. Similarly, keep sending me your suggestions in future also through Namo App and MyGov. In the coming days, we will have the festival of Eid in the country. Akshaya Tritiya and the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Parashuram will also be celebrated on 3rd May. A few days later, the festival of Vaishakh Budh Purnima will also come. All these festivals are festivals of restraint, purity, charity and harmony. Advance greetings to all of you on the occasion of these festivals. Celebrate these festivals with great gaiety and harmony. In the midst of all this, you also have to be alert of Corona. Wearing a mask, washing hands at regular intervals, whatever are the necessary measures for prevention, keep following them. Next time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we will meet again and discuss some more new topics sent by you – till then let’s bid goodbye.
Thank you very much!


89. MAY 29, 2022
My dear countrymen, Namaskar!
Today once again through ‘Mann Ki Baat’ I have got an opportunity to meet you all; millions of my family members. I welcome all of you to ‘Mann Ki Baat’. A few days ago, the country has made an achievement, which inspires all of us… instills a new confidence in India’s prowess. You must be feeling happy on hearing of the century of a batsman of Team India on the cricket field. But, India has scored a century in another field and it is very special. On the 5th of this month, the number of unicorns in the country has reached the figure of 100 and you surely know that a unicorn is a start-up worth at least seven and a half thousand crore rupees. The total valuation of these Unicorns is more than 330 billion dollars, that is, more than 25 lakh crore rupees. Certainly, this is a matter of pride for every Indian. You will also be surprised to know that out of our total unicorns, forty four came up last year. Not only that, 14 more Unicorns were formed anew in 3-4 months this year. This means that even in this phase of the global pandemic, our start-ups have been creating wealth and value. The average annual growth rate of Indian Unicorns is more than those of USA, UK and many other countries. Analysts also say that in the coming years there will be a sharp spike in these numbers. The good thing is that our Unicorns are diversifying. They are operating in many fields like E-commerce, Fin-Tech, Ed-Tech, Bio-Tech. Another thing which I consider more important is that the world of start-ups is reflecting the spirit of New India. Today, India’s start-up ecosystem is not limited to just big cities; entrepreneurs are emerging from smaller cities and towns as well. This shows that in India, the one who has an innovative idea, can create wealth.
Friends, behind this success of the country, the youth-power of the land, the talent and the government here, all are putting in efforts together… everyone is contributing. But, another thing that is important in the world of Start-Ups is, right mentoring, that is, right guidance. A good mentor can take a start-up to new heights… can guide the founders in every way toward the right decision. I am proud that there are many such mentors in India who have dedicated themselves to promote Start-ups.
Sridhar Vembu ji has recently received the Padma Award. He himself is a successful entrepreneur, but now he has also taken up upon himself the task of grooming other entrepreneurs. Shridhar ji has started his work from a rural area. He is encouraging the rural youth to do something in this area, staying in the village itself. We also have people like Madan Padaaki who had created a platform named One-Bridge in 2014 to promote rural entrepreneurs. Today, One-Bridge is present in more than 75 districts of southern and eastern India. More than 9000 rural entrepreneurs associated with it are providing their services to rural consumers. Meera Shenoy ji is also one such example. She is doing remarkable work in the field of Market Linked Skills Training for rural, tribal and disabled youth. I have mentioned only a few names here, but today there is no dearth of mentors among us. It is a matter of great happiness for us that today a complete support system is evolving in the country for start-ups. I am sure that in the times to come, we will get to see a new flight of progress in the start-up world of India.
Friends, a few days ago I found an interesting and attractive thing which is full of colours of the creativity of the countrymen and their artistic talent. It is a gift sent to me by Self-Help Group from Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu. This gift bears the fragrance of Indianness and the blessings of Matri-Shakti – a glimpse of her affection for me. This is a special Thanjavur Doll, which also has a GI Tag. I offer special thanks to the Thanjavur Self-Help Group for sending me this gift imbued in the local culture. In a way, friends, this Thanjavur Doll besides being beautiful that it is, is also scripting a new saga of women empowerment. Women’s Self-Help Groups stores and kiosks are also opening up in Thanjavur. Because of this, the lives of many poor families have changed. With the help of such kiosks and stores, women are now able to sell their products directly to the customers. The initiative has been named ‘Tharagaigal Kaivinai Porutkal Virpanai Angadi’. The special thing is that 22 Self-Help Groups are associated with this initiative. You would also be happy to know that these stores of Women Self Help Groups have opened at very prime locations in Thanjavur. Women themselves are taking full responsibility of their upkeep as well. Apart from GI products like Thanjaur Doll and Bronze Lamp , these women Self Help Groups, also craft toys, mats and artificial jewellery. Due to such stores, the sales of GI products as well as handicraft products have seen a significant rise. Through this campaign, not only have the artisans got a fillip, but the women are also getting empowered by a rise in their income. I also urge the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’… find out which Women Self Help Groups are working in your area. You should also collect information about their products and use these products as much as possible. By doing this, you will not only help in increasing the income of the Self Help Groups, but will also give impetus to the ‘Self-reliant India Campaign’.
Friends, our country is a rich treasure house  of many languages, scripts and dialects. Varied attire, cuisine and culture in different regions is our hallmark. As a nation this diversity strengthens us and keeps us united. I wish to share with all of you a very inspiring example related to this, which is that of beti Kalpana, . Her name is Kalpana, but her endeavor is full of the true spirit of ‘Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat’. Actually, Kalpana has recently passed her class 10th examination in Karnataka, but, the very special thing about her success is that, Kalpana did not know Kannada language till some time ago. She not only learned Kannada language in three months, but also proved it by scoring 92 marks. You might be surprised to know this, but it is true. There are many other things about her that will amaze you and will also inspire you. Kalpana is originally from Joshimath in Uttarakhand. She had been suffering from TB earlier and when she was in the class three she lost her eyesight too, but, as they say, ‘where there is a will, there is a way’. Kalpana later came in contact with Professor Taramurthy, a resident of Mysuru, who not only encouraged her but also helped her in every way. Today, through her hard work, she has set an example for all of us. I congratulate Kalpana for her fortitude. Similarly, there are many people in our country who are working towards strengthening the linguistic diversity of the country. One such friend Shripati Tudu ji hails from Purulia in West Bengal. Tudu ji is a professor of Santhali language at Sidho-Kaano-Birsa University, Purulia. He has prepared a version of the country’s Constitution in his native ‘Ol Chiki’ script for the Santhali community. Shripati Tudu ji asserts that our Constitution makes every citizen of our country aware of one’s rights and duties. Therefore, it is important for every citizen to be familiar with it. Therefore, he prepared a copy of the constitution in his own script for the Santhali community and offered it as a gift. I appreciate this thinking of Shripati ji and his efforts. This is a living example of the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat’. You will also find information about many such efforts furthering this spirit, on the website of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’. Here you will get to know about activities on many such subjects including food, art, culture, tourism. You can also take part in these activities, this will give you information about your country, and you will also experience the diversity of the country.
My dear countrymen, the holy pilgrimage of ‘Char-Dham’ in Uttarakhand is currently underway in our country. Thousands of devotees are reaching every day at ‘Char-Dham’ and especially in Kedarnath. People are sharing happy experiences of their ‘Char-Dham Yatra’. But, I have also seen that some devotees are also very sad because of the filth being spread by some pilgrims in Kedarnath. Many people have expressed their views on social media as well. Going on a holy pilgrimage and coming across a heap of filth there is not right. But friends, in the midst of these complaints, one is getting to see many good pictures too. Where there is faith, there is also creation and positivity. There are many devotees who are worshiping in the Dham of Baba Kedar, as well as performing the sadhna of cleanliness. Some are cleaning near the place of stay, while others are cleaning garbage along the travel route. Many organizations and voluntary organizations are also working there along with the Swachh Bharat campaign team. Friends, just as a pilgrimage is important here; equally important is ‘teertha sewa’ as has been mentioned and I would also say that without ‘teertha sewa’, a pilgrimage is also incomplete. There are many people in Devbhoomi Uttarakhand who are engaged in the ‘sadhana’ of cleanliness and service. You will be greatly inspired by Shriman Manoj Bainjwal hailing form Rudra Prayag. For the last 25 years, Manoj ji has taken it upon himself to look after the environment. Apart from running the campaign of cleanliness, he is also engaged in making holy places plastic free. While, Surendra Bagwadi ji hailing from Guptkashi  has also made cleanliness his life mantra. In  Guptkashi, he regularly runs cleanliness programmes, and, I have learned that he has also named this campaign as ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Similarly, Champa Devi from village Devar has been teaching waste management to women of the village. Champa ji has planted hundreds of trees and through sheer hard work she has set up a stretch of forest full of greenery. Friends, through the efforts of such people the divinity of Dev Bhoomi and holy places has been maintained…We go there to experience it, so it is our responsibility to maintain this divinity and spirituality. Along with ‘Chardham Yatra’ in our country, there will be many yatras like ‘Amarnath Yatra’, ‘Pandharpur Yatra’ and ‘Jagannath Yatra’ in the coming times. In the month of Sawan, some fair or the other is held, perhaps in every village.
Friends, wherever we go, let us maintain the dignity of these pilgrimage sites. Purity, cleanliness and a pious environment… we should never forget these and for that, it is imperative that we abide by the resolution of cleanliness. A few days later, the world will celebrate the 5th of June as  ‘Environment Day’. We should run positive  environment campaigns around us and this is a never ending task. This time, you should join everyone together – you should certainly make some effort for cleanliness and tree plantation. Plant a tree yourself and inspire others too.
My dear countrymen, next month on the 21st of June, we are going to celebrate the 8th ‘International Yoga Day’. This time the theme of ‘Yoga Day’ is – Yoga for Humanity. I would urge all of you to celebrate ‘Yoga Day’ with great enthusiasm. Yes! Also take precautions related to corona. By the way, the situation now is looking better than earlier across the whole world. On account of more and more vaccination coverage, people now are going out more than ever; therefore, a lot of preparations are also being seen all over the world for ‘Yoga Day’. The corona pandemic has made all of us realize the overarching importance of health in our lives and Yoga being a great medium in ensuring the same. People are experiencing how much physical, spiritual and intellectual well being is receiving a boost through Yoga. From the world’s top business persons to film and sports personalities, from students to common people, everyone is making yoga an integral part of one’s life. I do believe that witnessing the increasing popularity of Yoga across the world must be making you happy. Friends, this time I have come to know about some very innovative examples being held on ‘Yoga Day’ in the country and abroad. One of these is Guardian Ring – it will be a very unique programme. In this, the Movement of the Sun will be celebrated, that is, as the sun travels, we will welcome it through yoga from different parts of the earth. Indian missions in different countries will organize yoga programs at sunrise according to the local time there. The program will successively commence, following one country after another. The journey from east to west will go on continuously…and on these lines, it will proceed accordingly. Streaming of these programs will also be linked one after the other, that is, it will be a kind of relay Yoga streaming event. Do watch it.
Friends, this time keeping in mind the ‘Amrit Mahotsav’ in our country, ‘International Yoga Day’ will also be organized at 75 major places in the country. On this occasion, many organizations and countrymen are preparing to do something innovative at their own level, in their respective fields. I would urge you also this time to celebrate Yoga Day, choose any place in your city, town or village which is most special. This place can be an ancient temple and tourist center, or it could be the banks of a famous river, lake or pond. With this, along with yoga, the identity of your area will also be reinforced and tourism there will also get a boost. At present, the 100 day countdown leading to ‘Yoga Day’, is also underway; rather, programs based on personal and social efforts, have already begun three months ago. On these lines, there have been countdown programs of 100th day and 75th day in Delhi. Similarly, 50th Countdown Events were organized in Sivasagar, Assam and 25th in Hyderabad. I wish you should also start preparations for ‘Yoga Day’ on your own right now. Meet more and more people, urge everyone to join the program of ‘Yoga Day’; inspire them. I am sure that all of you will participate enthusiastically in the ‘Yoga Day’, as well as adopt yoga in your daily life.
Friends, a few days ago I had gone to Japan. Amid many of my programmes, I got a chance to meet some wonderful personalities. I want to discuss about them with you in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Though they belong to Japan, they harbour amazing attachment and love for India. One of them is Hiroshi Koike ji, who is a well-known Art Director. You will be very happy to know that he has directed the Mahabharat Project. This project was started in Cambodia and it is continuing for the last 9 years. Hiroshi Koike ji performs every task in a very different way. Every year, he travels to one country in Asia and produces parts of the Mahabharata with local artists and musicians there. Through this project, he has done productions and given stage performances in nine countries including India, Cambodia and Indonesia. Hiroshi Koike-ji brings together artists who have had a diverse background in Classical and Traditional Asian Performing Art. Because of that, different hues are seen in his work. Performers from Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia and Japan make it more attractive through Java dance, Balinese dance, Thai dance. The special thing is that in this each performer speaks in his own mother tongue and the choreography very beautifully displays this diversity and the diversity of music makes this production more lively. Their aim is to bring to the fore the importance of Diversity and Co-existence in our society and what peace should really be like. Besides them, the other two people I met in Japan are Atsushi Matsuo-ji and Kenji Yoshi-ji. Both of them are associated with TEM Production Company. This company is associated with the Japanese Animation Film based on Ramayana that was released in 1993. This project was associated with Japan’s very famous film director Yugo Sako Ji. About 40 years ago, in 1983, he came to know about Ramayana for the first time. ‘Ramayana’ touched his heart, after which he started researching deeply on it. Not only that, he read 10 versions of Ramayana in Japanese language, and not only did he stop at this, he also wanted to showcase it through animation. In this, Indian animators also helped him a lot, he was guided about the Indian customs and traditions shown in the film. He was told how people in India wear the dhoti, how they wear the saree, how they groom their hair… How children respect each other within the family, what the tradition of blessing is!  Waking up in the morning, offering salutation to the elders of the household, seeking their blessings – all these things! Now, after 30 years this animation film is being re-mastered in 4K. This project is likely to be completed soon. People living thousands of kilometers away from us in Japan, who don’t know our language, who don’t know much about our traditions, their dedication to our culture, this reverence, this respect, is very commendable – which Indian would not be proud of that!
My dear countrymen, the mantra of serving the society by rising above the self, is a part of our values, our sanskar. Countless people in our country are making this mantra their life goal. I came to know about Ram Bhupal Reddy ji, a friend living in Markapuram, Andhra Pradesh. You will be surprised to know that Ram Bhupal Reddy ji has donated all his earnings after retirement for the education of daughters. He got accounts opened for about 100 daughters under ‘Sukanya Samridhi Yojana’, and deposited more than 25 lakhs in it. Another example of such service is of  Kachora village of Agra in U.P. There was a shortage of fresh water in this village for many years. Meanwhile, Kunwar Singh, a farmer of the village found water in his field 6-7 km away from the village. It was a matter of great joy for him. He thought… why not serve all the other villagers too with this water! But, 30-32 lakh rupees were needed to transport the water from the farm to the village. After some time, Kunwar Singh’s younger brother Shyam Singh came to the village after retiring from the army, and he came to know about it. He handed over all his money received on retirement for this work and by laying a pipeline from the farm to the village; he supplied fresh water to the villagers. If there is dedication, seriousness towards one’s duties, how even a single person can change the future of the whole society, this endeavor is a big inspiration. Only by walking on the path of duty can we empower the society; empower the country. In this Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav’, this should be our resolution and this should also be our sadhana….which has only one path – duty, duty and duty.
My dear countrymen, today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we discussed many important topics related to society. All of you send important suggestions related to different topics to me, and on the basis of them our discussion moves forward. Don’t forget to send your suggestions for the next edition of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. At present, the ongoing programs related to the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav; the events in which you are participating… do let me know about them. I look forward to your suggestions on Namo app and MyGov. Next time we will meet once again… we will again talk on similar topics related to our countrymen. Take care of yourself and also take care of all the living being around you. In this summer season, you should continue to fulfill your humane responsibility of providing food and water for the animals and birds…Do remember this. Thank you very much.


90. JUNE 26, 2022
Hello my dear countrymen Namaskar! I have received many letters from all of you for ‘Mann Ki Baat’; I have also received many messages on social media and NaMoApp. I am very thankful to you for that. In this program, it is our endeavour to discuss each other’s inspiring efforts; to tell the story of change through mass movement to the entire country. In this episode, I want to discuss with you today one such mass movement of the country, that holds great importance in the life of every citizen of the country. But, before that I want to ask a question to the youth of today’s generation, to the youth in the age group of 24-25 years, and the question is very serious… do ponder my question over. Did you know that when your parents were your age, once even their right to life was snatched away from them? You must be thinking how could have this happened? This is just impossible! But my young friends, this had happened once in our country. This took place years ago in 1975. It was the month of June when emergency was imposed. In that, all the rights were taken away from the citizens of the country. One amongst those rights was the ‘Right to Life and Personal Liberty’ provided to all Indians under Article 21 of the Constitution. At that time an attempt was made to crush the democracy of India. The country’s courts, every constitutional institution, the press, were put under control. The condition of censorship was such that nothing could be printed without approval. I remember when famous singer Kishore Kumar refused to applaud the government, he was banned. His entry on the radio was done away with. But even after many attempts, thousands of arrests, and atrocities on lakhs of people, the faith of the people of India in democracy did not shake… not at all! For us, the people of India, the sanskars ​​of democracy which we have been carrying on for centuries; the democratic spirit which is in our veins, finally won. The people of India got rid of the emergency and re-established democracy in a democratic way. It is difficult to find such an example of defeating a dictatorial mindset, a dictatorial tendency in a democratic way, in the whole world. During the Emergency, I had the good fortune to have been a witness; to be a partner in the struggle of the countrymen – as a soldier of democracy. Today, when the country is celebrating 75 years of its independence, celebrating Amrit Mahotsav, we should never forget that dreadful period of emergency. The generations to come should also not forget. The Amrit Mahotsav not only encompasses the victory saga of freedom from hundreds of years of slavery, but also the journey of 75 years after independence. We move forward, learning from every important stage of history.
My dear countrymen, there is hardly any of us who, in one’s life, has not had fantasies pertaining to the sky. During one’s childhood, stories of the moon and stars in the sky attract everyone. For the youth, touching the sky is synonymous with making dreams come true. Today, when our India is touching the sky of success in so many fields, how can the skies, or space, remain untouched by it! In the past few years, many big feats related to the space sector have been accomplished in our country. One of these achievements of the country has been the creation of an agency named In-Space… an agency that is promoting new opportunities in the space sector for the private sector of India. This beginning has especially attracted the youth of our country. I have received messages related to this from many young people.
A few days ago when I had gone to dedicate to the people the headquarters of In-Space, I saw the ideas and enthusiasm of many young start-ups. I also talked to them for a long time. You too will not be able to help being surprised when you learn about them. For example, take just the number and speed of space start-ups. Till a few years ago, in our country, in the space sector, no one even thought about start-ups. Today their number is more than a hundred. All these start-ups are working on ideas, which were either not thought about earlier, or were considered impossible for the private sector. For example, Chennai and Hyderabad have two start-ups – Agnikul and Skyroot! These start-ups are developing launch vehicles that will take small payloads into space. Through this, the cost of Space Launching is estimated to come down significantly. Similarly, Dhruva Space, another Start-Up of Hyderabad, is working on High Technology Solar Panels for Satellite Deployer and Satellites. I also met Tanveer Ahmed of Digantara, another space start-up who is trying to map waste in space. I have also given him a challenge that they should evolve work technology, which can solve the problem of waste in space. Both Digantara and Dhruva Space are going to make their first launch from ISRO’s launch vehicle on the 30th of June. Similarly, Neha, the founder of Astrome, a space start-up based in Bangalore, is also working on an amazing idea. This start-up is making such flat antennas which will not only be small, but their cost will also be very low. Demand for this technology can be all over the world.
Friends, in the program of In-Space, I also met beti Tanvi Patel, a school student of Mehsana. She is working on a very small satellite, which is going to be launched in space in the next few months. Tanvi told me about her work very simply in Gujarati. Like Tanvi, about seven hundred and fifty school students in the country are working on 75 such satellites in the Amrit Mahotsav, and it is also a matter of joy that, most of these students are from small towns of the country.
Friends, these are the same youth, in whose mind the image of the space sector was like a secret mission a few years ago, but, the country undertook space reforms, and the same youth are now launching their own satellites. When the youth of the country is ready to touch the sky, how can our country be left behind?
My dear countrymen, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, let’s now talk about a topic that will delight your mind and inspire you as well. Recently, our Olympic gold medalist Neeraj Chopra was again in the headlines. Even after the Olympics, he is setting new records of success, one after the other. Neeraj won the silver at Paavo Nurmi Games in Finland. Not only that, He also broke the record of his own Javelin Throw. Neeraj once again made the country proud by winning the gold in Kuortane Games. He won this gold in conditions when the weather there was also inclement. This zest is the hallmark of today’s youth. From Start-Ups to the Sports World, the youth of India are making new records. In the recently held Khelo India Youth Games too, our players set many records. You would love to know that a total of 12 records have been broken in these games – not only that, 11 records have been registered in the names of female players. M. Martina Devi of Manipur has made eight records in weightlifting.
Similarly, Sanjana, Sonakshi and Bhavna have also made different records. With their hard work, these players have proven how much India’s prestige is going to rise in international sports arena in the coming times. I also congratulate all these players and wish them all the best for the future.
Friends, there has been another special feature of Khelo India Youth Games. This time too many such talents have emerged, who are from very ordinary families. These players have struggled a lot in their lives to reach this stage of success. In their success, their family, and parents too, have had a big role to play.
Father of Adil Altaf from Srinagar, who won the gold in 70 km cycling, does tailoring work, but, has left no stone unturned to fulfill his son’s dreams. Today Adil has brought pride to his father and the entire Jammu-Kashmir. Gold winner L. Dhanush’s father is a carpenter in Chennai. Sangli’s daughter Kajol Sargar’s father works as a tea vendor. Kajol would help her father and practice weight lifting as well. This hard work of hers and her family paid off and Kajol has won a lot of accolades in weight lifting. Tanu of Rohtak has performed a similar kind of miracle. Tanu’s father Rajbir Singh is a school bus driver in Rohtak. By winning the gold medal in wrestling, Tanu has realized her own, her family’s and her father’s dream.
Friends, in the sports world, now, the dominance of Indian players is increasing; at the same time, a new image of Indian sports is also emerging. For example, in Khelo India Youth Games, besides disciplines that are in Olympics, five indigenous sports, were also included this time. These five sports are – Gatka, Thang Ta, Yogasan, Kalaripayattu and Mallakhamb.
Friends, there is going to be an international tournament of a game which was born centuries ago in our own country…in India. This is the event of Chess Olympiad beginning from the 28th July. This time, more than 180 countries are participating in the Chess Olympiad. Today’s discussion of sports and fitness cannot be complete without another name – this is the name of Telangana’s mountaineer Poorna Malavath. By completeing the 7 summit challenge Poorna has added another feather in her cap of success. The seven summit challenge…that is the challenge of surmounting seven most difficult and highest mountain peaks. With her indomitable spirit, Purva ascended the highest peak of North America Mount Denali and brought honour to the counry. Poorna is the same daughter of India who had accomplished the amazing feat of done a conquering Mount Everest at the age of just 13.
Friends, when it comes to sports, today I would also like to discuss Mithali Raj, one of the most talented cricketers in India.
Just this month, she has announced her retirement from cricket which has emotionally moved many sports lovers. Mithali has not only been an extraordinary player, but has also been an inspiration to many players. I wish Mithali all the very best for her future.
My dear countrymen, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we have been discussing the successful efforts related to ‘waste to wealth’. One such example is that of Aizwal, the capital of Mizoram. There is a beautiful river ‘Chitte Lui’ in Aizwal, which due to neglect for years, had turned into a heap of dirt and garbage. Efforts have started in the last few years to save this river. For this, local agencies, voluntary organizations and local people, together, are also running the Save Chitte Lui action plan. This campaign of cleaning the river has also made an opportunity for wealth creation from waste. Actually, this river and its banks were full of plastic and polythene waste. The organization working to save the river, decided to build a road using this polythene, that is, the waste that came out of the river. From that, in a village in Mizoram, the state’s first plastic road was built… that is cleanliness and development as well.
Friends, one such effort has also been undertaken by the youth of Puducherry through their voluntary organizations. Puducherry is situated along the sea coast. A large number of people come to see the beaches and marine beauty there. But, the pollution caused by plastic was also increasing on the sea coast of Puducherry, therefore, to save its sea, beaches and ecology, people here have started the ‘Recycling for Life’ campaign. Today, thousands of kilograms of garbage is collected and segregated every day in Karaikal, Puducherry. The organic waste from that is made into compost; the rest of the matter is separated and recycled. Such efforts are not only inspiring, but also lend momentum to India’s campaign against single use plastic.
Friends, at this time when I am talking to you, a unique cycling rally is also going on in Himachal Pradesh. I want to tell you about this too. A group of cyclists have started from Shimla to Mandi carrying the message of cleanliness. These people will complete this distance of about one hundred and seventy five kilometers on mountain roads, only by cycling. There are children as well as the elderly in this group. If our environment is clean, our mountains and rivers, our seas remain clean; our health also gets better. You must keep writing me about such efforts.
My dear countrymen, monsoon is continuously progressing in our country. Rain is increasing in many states. This is also the time to make special efforts in the direction of ‘water’ and ‘water conservation’. In our country, for centuries, this responsibility has been taken by the society together. You will remember, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we once discussed the legacy of step wells. The Baolis are those big wells which are reached by descending stairs. In Udaipur, Rajasthan, there is one such stepwell which is hundreds of years old – ‘Sultan Ki Baoli’. It was built by Rao Sultan Singh, but due to neglect, gradually this place has become deserted and has turned into a pile of garbage. One day some youths roaming around reached this stepwell and were very sad to see its condition. At that very moment these youths resolved to change the picture and destiny of Sultan Ki Baoli. They named this mission of their – ‘Sultan se Sur-Tan’. You must be wondering, what is this ‘Sur Tan! In fact, with their efforts, these youths have not only rejuvenated the step well, but have also linked it to the notes and melody of the music. After cleaning the Sultan’s stepwell, after decorating it, takes place a program of harmony and music. There is so much talk of this change, that many people from abroad have started coming to see it. The most important thing about this successful effort is that the youth who started the campaign are chartered accountants. Coincidentally, a few days from now, July 1 is observed as chartered accountants day. I congratulate all the CAs of the country in advance. We can create a similar sense of awareness about our water bodies by connecting them with music and other social programs. Water conservation is actually life conservation. You must have seen, nowadays, how many ‘river festivals’ are being held! Whichever water sources are there in your cities, you must organize one event or the other.
My dear countrymen, our Upanishads mention about a life mantra- ‘Charaiveti-Charaiveti-Charaiveti’- you must have heard this mantra too. It means – keep going, keep going. This mantra is so popular in our country because it is part of our nature to keep moving, to be dynamic; to keep moving. As a nation, we have come this far through a journey of development spanning thousands of years. As a society, we have always moved ahead by accepting new ideas, new changes. Our cultural mobility and travels have contributed a lot in this. That is why our sages and saints had entrusted us with spiritual responsibilities like pilgrimage. All of us go on varied pilgrimages. You must have seen that this time a large number of devotees participated in the Chardham Yatra. In our country, from time to time, different Dev-yatras also take place. Dev Yatras… that is, in which not only the devotees but also our Gods go on a journey. In just a few days from now on the 1st of July, the famous journey of Lord Jagannath is going to commence. All of us are familiar with the Puri yatra in Odisha. People make efforts to ensure that on this occasion they get the good fortune of going to Puri. In other states too, Jagannath Yatras are taken out with great gaiety and fervour. Bhagwan Jagannath Yatra begins on Dwitiya, the second day of the month of Ashadha. In our texts ‘Ashadhasya Dwitiya divase… Rath Yatra’, this is how the description is found in Sanskrit shlokas. In Ahmedabad, Gujrat too, every year Rath Yatra begins from Ashadh Dwitiya. I was in Gujarat, so I also used to get the privilege of serving in this Yatra every year. Ashadha Dwitiya, also known as Ashadhi Bij, marks the beginning of the new year of Kutch on this day. I also wish Happy New Year to all my Kutchi brothers and sisters. For me this day is also very special – I remember, a day before Ashadha Dwitiya, that is, on the first Tithi of Ashadha, we started a Sanskrit festival in Gujarat, which comprises songs, music and cultural programs in Sanskrit language. The name of this event is – ‘Ashadhasya Pratham Diwase’. There is also a reason behind giving this special name to the festival. Actually, the great Sanskrit poet Kalidas wrote the Meghdootam on the arrival of rain from the month of Ashadh. There is a verse in Meghdootam – Ashadhasya Pratham Diwase, Megham Ashlishta Sanum, that is, mountain peaks covered with clouds on the first day of Ashadha, this verse became the basis of this event.
Friends, be it Ahmedabad or Puri, Lord Jagannath also gives us many deep human messages through this journey. Bhagwan Jagannath is the lord of the world, but the poor and downtrodden have a special participation in his journey. God also walks along with every section and person of the society. Similarly, in all the journeys that take place in our country, there is no such distinction between poor and rich, high and low. Rising above all discrimination, the journey itself is paramount. As you must have heard about the Yatra of Pandharpur in Maharashtra…. In the Pandharpur Yatra, one is neither big nor small. Everyone is a Varkari, a servant of Bhagwan Vitthal. Just 4 days later,the Amarnath Yatra is also going to start from the 30th of June. Devotees from all over the country reach Jammu Kashmir for the Amarnath Yatra. The local people of Jammu Kashmir take the responsibility of this Yatra with equal reverence, and cooperate with the pilgrims.
Friends, the Sabarimala Yatra has the same importance in the South. This pilgrimage to seek Darshan of Bhagwan Ayyappa on the hills of Sabarimala has been going on from the times when this path was completely surrounded by forests. Even today, when people go on these yatras, how many opportunities are created for the poor… from religious rituals to lodging arrangements… that is, these yatras directly give us an opportunity to serve the poor and are equally beneficial to them. That is why the country, too, is now making many efforts to increase the facilities for the devotees in their spiritual journeys. If you too go on such a journey, you will also have a glance of Ek Bharat- Shreshtha Bharat along with spirituality.
My dear countrymen, as always, this time also it was a very pleasant experience to connect with all of you through ‘Mann Ki Baat’. We discussed the successes and achievements of the countrymen. In the midst of all this, we also have to take precautions against Corona. However, it is a matter of satisfaction that today the country has a comprehensive protective shield of a vaccine. We have reached close to 200 crore vaccine doses. Precaution dose is also being rapidly administered in the country. If it is time for a precaution dose after your second dose, then you must take this third dose. Make your family members, especially the elderly, take a precautionary dose. We also have to take necessary precautions like hand hygiene and masks. We also have to be alert of the diseases caused by the surrounding filth during the rainy season. All of you stay alert, stay healthy and keep moving forward with similar positive energy. We’ll meet again next month, until then, many many thanks. Namaskar!


91. JULY 31, 2022
My dear countrymen, Namaskar!
This is the 91st episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Earlier we have talked about so many things, shared our views on myriad topics, but, this time ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is very special. The reason for this is Independence Day this time, when India will complete 75 years of her independence. We are all going to be witness to a splendid and historic moment. The Almighty has blessed us with this great fortune. Think about it… had we been born in the era of slavery, then how would have we imagined this day? That yearning of freedom from slavery, the desperation for freedom from the shackles of subjugation – how formidable it must have been! Those days, when, every single day, we would be seeing millions of countrymen fighting, battling, making sacrifices for the sake of freedom. Then we would wake up every morning with this dream of when my India would be free…. and maybe that day would dawn in our lives when we would dedicate our lives to the generations to come, chanting Vande Mataram and Bharat Maa Ki Jai, spending our youth for the cause.
Friends, on the 31st of July i.e. today, all of us countrymen salute the martyrdom of Shaheed Udham Singh ji. I offer my humble tributes to all such other great revolutionaries who sacrificed their all for the country.
Friends, I am very happy to see that the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav is taking the form of a mass movement. People from all walks of life and from every section of the society are participating in different programs connected with it. One such event took place in Meghalaya earlier this month. People remembered the brave warrior of Meghalaya U. Tirot Singh on his death anniversary. Tirot Singh ji fiercely opposed the British conspiracy to control the Khasi Hills and destroy the culture there. Many artists gave beautiful performances in this program. They made history come alive. A carnival was also organized as part of the event, in which the great culture of Meghalaya was depicted in a beautiful manner. A few weeks ago, in Karnataka, a unique campaign named Amrita Bharathi Kannadarthi was also launched. In this, grand programs related to the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav were organized at 75 places in the state. In these, along with remembering the great freedom fighters of Karnataka, efforts were also made to bring to the fore the local literary achievements.
Friends, in this very July an interesting endeavour has been undertaken, named Azadi Ki Railgadi Aur Railway Station. The objective of this effort is to make people know the role of Indian Railways in the freedom struggle. There are many such railway stations in the country, which are associated with the history of the freedom movement. You too will be surprised to know about these railway stations. Gomoh Junction in Jharkhand is now officially known as Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose Junction Gomoh. Do you know why? Actually at this very station, Netaji Subhash was successful in dodging British officers by boarding the Kalka Mail. All of you must have heard the name of Kakori Railway Station near Lucknow. The names of bravehearts like Ram Prasad Bismil and Ashfaq Ullah Khan are associated with this station. The brave revolutionaries had displayed their might to the British by looting the treasury of the British being carried by train. Whenever you talk to the people of Tamil Nadu, you will get to know about Vanchi Maniyachchi Junction in Thoothukudi district. This station is named after Tamil freedom fighter Vanchinathan ji. This is the same place where Vanchi, 25 years of age then, had punished one British collector for his actions.
Friends, this list is pretty long. 75 such railway stations have been identified spread over 24 states across the country. These 75 stations are being decorated very ornately. Many types of programs are also being organized in these. You should also take out time to visit one such historical station in your vicinity. You will get to know in detail about pages from the history of the freedom movement that you have not been aware of. I urge the students of the nearby school, and the teachers to take the small children of their school to the station and narrate the whole chain of events to those children, explaining them.
My dear countrymen, under the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav, from the 13th to the 15th of August, a special movement – ​​’Har Ghar Tiranga- Har Ghar Tiranga’ is being organized. By becoming a part of this movement, from August 13 to 15, you must hoist the tricolor at your home, or adorn your home with it. The Tricolor connects us, inspires us to do something for the country. I also have a suggestion that from the 2nd of August to the 15th of August, all of us can place the tricolor in our social media profile pictures. By the way, do you know, 2nd of August also has a special connection with our tricolor. This day is the birth anniversary of Pingali Venkaiah ji who designed our national flag. I pay my respectful homage to him. Talking about our national flag, I will also remember the great revolutionary Madam Cama. Her role in shaping the Tricolor has been very important.
Friends, the biggest message that emerges from all these events being organized in the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav is that all of us countrymen should follow our duty with full devotion. Only then will we be able to fulfill the dream of those countless freedom fighters… and to build the India of their dreams. That is why this Amrit Kaal of our next 25 years is Kartavyakaal, a period of duty for every countryman.
To liberate the country, our brave fighters had given us this responsibility, and we have to fulfill it fully.
My dear countrymen, the fight of our countrymen against Corona is still on. The whole world is still struggling today. The increasing interest of people in Holistic Healthcare has helped everyone a lot in this. We all know how useful Indian traditional methods are in this. In the fight against Corona, AYUSH has played an important role, at the global level. There is a growing interest in Ayurveda and Indian medicine around the world. This is one of the major reasons why Ayush Exports have witnessed a record growth and it is also a matter of joy that many new start-ups are also emerging in this sector. Recently, a Global Ayush Investment and Innovation Summit was held. You will be surprised to know that in this, investment proposals of about ten thousand crore rupees have been received. Another very important happening during the corona period is that, there has been a lot of increase in research on medicinal plants. Many research studies are being published on this. It is definitely a good start.
Friends, another great effort has been made in the country in the field of varied medicinal plants and herbs. The Indian Virtual Herbarium was just launched in the month of July. It is also an example of how we can use the digital world to connect with our roots. The Indian Virtual Herbarium is an interesting collection of digital images of preserved plants or plant parts, which is freely available on the web. More than one lakh Specimens and Scientific Information related to them are available on this Virtual Herbarium. In the Virtual Herbarium, a rich picture of the Botanical Diversity of India is also visible. I am sure the Indian Virtual Herbarium will become an important resource for research on Indian flora.
My dear countrymen, every time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we discuss successes of the countrymen which bring smiles to our faces. If a success story spreads sweet smiles, and also tastes sweet, you will certainly call it icing on the cake. These days our farmers are performing similar wonders in the production of honey. The sweetness of honey is also changing the lives of our farmers, increasing their income. In Yamunanagar, Harayana, there lives a beekeeper friend- Subhash Kamboj ji. Subhash ji underwent training in beekeeping in a scientific way. After that he started his work with just six boxes. Today he is engaged in beekeeping using about two thousand boxes. His honey is supplied across many states. Vinod Kumar ji is also beekeeping in more than one and a half thousand colonies in Palli village of Jammu. He has undertaken training in rearing the queen bee last year. Through this work, he is earning 15 to 20 lakh rupees annually. There is another farmer from Karnataka – Madhukeshwar Hegde ji. Madhukeshwar ji says that he had availed of subsidy from the Government of India for 50 bee colonies. Today he possesses over 800 colonies, and sells tons of honey. He brought in innovation in his work, and is also making botanical honey like Jamun honey, Tulsi honey and Amla honey. Madhukeshwar ji, your innovation and success in madhu, honey production also makes your name meaningful.
Friends, you all know how much importance has been given to honey in our traditional health science. In Ayurveda texts, honey has been described as an elixir. Honey, not only imparts taste ; it also gives us health. There are so many possibilities in honey production today that even the youth pursuing professional studies are making it a source of self-employment. One such youth is –Nimit Singh of Gorakhpur,U.P. Nimit ji has done B.Tech. His father is also a doctor, but after his studies, instead of a job, Nimit ji decided to be self-employed. He started honey production. He also got his own lab set up in Lucknow for quality check. Nimit ji is now earning well from honey and Bee Wax, and is also training farmers, going to different states. Due to the hard work of such youth, today the country is becoming such a big honey producer. You will be happy to know that the export of honey from the country has also increased. The country started campaigns like National Beekeeping and Honey Mission, farmers worked hard, and the sweetness of our honey started reaching across the world. There are still huge possibilities in this field. I would like our youth to join these opportunities and take advantage of them and realize new possibilities.
My dear countrymen, I have received a letter from a listener of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, Shriman Ashish Bahl ji from Himachal Pradesh. He has mentioned in his letter the ‘Minjar Mela’ of Chamba. Actually, the inflorescence of the maize plant is called Minjar. When flowers bloom on the maize, Minjar Mela is also celebrated and in this fair, tourists from all over the country come from far and wide to take part. Incidentally, the Minjar fair is also going on at this time. If you have gone to visit Himachal, you can go to Chamba to see this fair.
“Chambe Ek Din Ona Kane Mahina Raina”
That is, those who come to Chamba for a day, they stay back here for a month seeing its beauty.
Friends, fairs have also been of great cultural importance in our country. Fairs connect people and hearts. When Kharif crops ripen after the rains in Himachal in September, in Shimla, Mandi, Kullu and Solan, Sari or Sair is also celebrated. Jagra is also going to arrive in September itself. In Jagra fairs, Bisu songs are sung after invoking the deity of Mahasu. This awakening of Mahasu Devta takes place in Himachal at Shimla, Kinnaur and Sirmaur; simultaneously in Uttarakhand.
Friends, there are many traditional fairs of tribal societies in different states in our country. Some of these fairs are associated with tribal culture, while some are organized in connection with tribal history and heritage. For example, if you get a chance, you must visit the four-day Samakka-Saralamma Jatara Fair in Medaram, Telangana. This fair is called Mahakumbh of Telangana. The Saralamma Jatara Mela is celebrated in honor of two tribal women heores – Samakka and Saralamma. It is a big center of faith for the Koya tribal community, not only in Telangana, but also in Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh. The Maridamma fair in Andhra Pradesh is also a big fair connected with the beliefs of the tribal society. The Maridamma fair runs from Jyeshtha Amavasya to Ashadh Amavasya and the tribal society here associates it with Shakti upasana, worship. Here, in Peddhapuram, East Godavari, there is also a Maridamma temple. Similarly, the people of Garasiya tribe in Rajasthan organize ‘Siyawa ka Mela’ or ‘Mankhan Ro Mela’ on Vaishakh Shukla Chaturdashi.
The ‘Mawli Mela’ of Narayanpur of Bastar in Chhattisgarh is also very special. Nearby, the Bhagoria Mela of Madhya Pradesh is also very famous. It is said that the Bhagoria fair started in the times of Raja Bhoj. Then the Bhil kings, Kasumara and Balun organized these events for the first time in their respective capitals. Ever since, these fairs are being celebrated with equal enthusiasm. Similarly, many fairs like Tarnetar and Madhopur are very famous in Gujarat. Fairs are, in themselves, a great source of energy for our society, our life. There must be many such fairs around you too. In modern times, these old links of the society are very important to strengthen the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat- Shreshtha Bharat’. Our youth must join them and whenever you go to such fairs, share the pictures on social media too. You can also use a specific hashtag if you want. Through this other people will also know about those fairs. You can also upload photos on the website of the Ministry of Culture. In the next few days, the Culture Ministry is going to start a competition, where, those who send the best pictures of the fairs will also be rewarded. So do not delay, visit the fairs, share their pictures, and maybe you will get rewarded too.
My dear countrymen, you must have noticed, in one episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ I had said that India has full potential to become a Powerhouse in Toys Exports. I had specially discussed the rich heritage of India in Sports and Games. The local toys of India are eco-friendly, consonant with both tradition and nature. Today I want to share with you the success of Indian Toys. Due to our Youngsters, Start-ups and Entrepreneurs, what our toy industry has achieved, the successes we have achieved, no one could have imagined. Today, when it comes to Indian toys, the echo of Vocal for Local is being heard everywhere. You will also like to know that now the number of toys coming from abroad in India is continuously decreasing. Earlier, where toys worth more than Rs 3 thousand crore used to come from outside, now their import has reduced by 70 percent and it is a matter of joy that during this period, India has exported toys worth more than two thousand six hundred crore rupees to foreign countries. Whereas earlier, only toys worth Rs 300-400 crore used to go out of India. And you already know that all this happened during the Corona period. India’s toy sector has proven its mettle by transforming itself. Indian Manufacturers are now making toys based on Indian Mythology, History and Culture. Toy clusters that are there everywhere in the country, small entrepreneurs who make toys, are getting a lot of benefit from it. The toys made by these small entrepreneurs are now going around the world. Toy manufacturers from India are also working closely with the world’s leading Global Toy Brands. I also liked that, our start-up sector is also paying full attention to the world of toys. They’re also doing a lot of fun things in this area. In Bangalore, a start-up named Shumme Toys is focusing on eco-friendly toys. In Gujarat, Arkidzoo Company is making AR-based Flash Cards and AR-based Storybooks. Pune-based company, Funvention is engaged in kindling the interest of children in Science, Technology and Maths through Learning, Toys and Activity Puzzles. I congratulate all such manufacturers, Start-ups, doing a great job in the world of toys. Let us all together make Indian toys more popular all over the world. Along with this, I would also like to urge the parents to buy more and more Indian Toys, Puzzles and Games.
Friends, be it the classroom or the playground, today our youth, in every field, are making the country proud. This month, PV Sindhu has won her first title of Singapore Open. Neeraj Chopra also continued his excellent performance and won the silver medal for the country in the World Athletics Championship. At the Ireland Para Badminton International as well, our players have boosted the glory of the country by winning 11 medals. Indian players also performed well in the World Cadet Wrestling Championship held in Rome. Our athlete Suraj has done wonders in the Greco-Roman event. He has won the Gold Medal of Wrestling in this event after a long gap of 32 years. For the players, this entire month has been full of action. It is also a great honor for India to host the 44th Chess Olympiad in Chennai. This tournament has commenced on the 28th of July and I got the privilege of attending its Opening Ceremony. Commonwealth Games also began in the UK on the same day. An Indian team, full of youthful enthusiasm is representing the country there. I extend my best wishes to all the players and athletes on behalf of the countrymen. I am also happy that India is going to host the FIFA Under 17 Women’s World Cup as well. This tournament will be held around October, which will enhance the enthusiasm of the daughters of the country towards sports.
Friends, a few days ago the results of class 10th and 12th have also been declared across the country. I congratulate all those students who have achieved success through their hard work and dedication. Due to the pandemic, the last two years have been extremely challenging. The courage and restraint shown by our youth in these circumstances is highly commendable. I wish everyone a bright future.
My dear countrymen, today we started our discussion on 75 years of Independence, with a visit across the country. The next time we meet, the journey of our next 25 years would have already begun. We all have to join for our beloved tricolor to be hoisted at our homes and those of our loved ones. Do share with me how you celebrated Independence Day, if you did anything special, this time. Next time, we will talk again about the different colors of our Amrit Parv. Till then, I take leave of you. Thank you very much.


92. AUGUST 28, 2022
My dear countrymen, Namaskar! In this month of August, all your letters, messages and cards have soaked my office in the hues of the tricolor. I have hardly come across any letter which does not carry the tricolor, or does not talk about the tricolor and Freedom. Children and young friends have sent beautiful pictures and artwork on the Amrit Mahotsav. In this month of independence, in our entire country, in every city, every village, the nectar of Amrit Mahotsav is flowing. On this special occasion of Amrit Mahotsav and Independence Day, we have seen the collective might of the country. There has been a sense of realisation. Such a big country, so many diversities, but when it came to hoisting the tricolor, everyone seemed to flow in the same spirit. People themselves came forward, becoming the vanguard of the pride of the tricolor. We had also seen the spirit of the country in the cleanliness campaign and the vaccination campaign. We are getting to witness the same spirit of patriotism again in the Amrit Mahotsav. Our soldiers hoisted the tricolor on the peaks of high mountains, on the borders of the country, and in the middle of the sea. People also came up with different innovative ideas for the tricolor campaign. Such as young friend, Krishnil Anil ji. Anil ji is a puzzle artist and has created beautiful tricolor mosaic art in record time. In Kolar, Karnataka, people presented a unique sight by holding the tricolor that was 630 feet long and 205 feet wide.
In Assam, government employees created a 20 feet tricolor with their own hands to hoist at the Dighalipukhuri War memorial. Similarly, people in Indore made the map of India through a human chain. In Chandigarh, the youth made a giant human tricolor. Both these efforts have also been recorded in the Guinness Records. In the midst of all this, a great inspirational example was also seen at the Gangot Panchayat of Himachal Pradesh. Here the children of migrant laborers were included as chief guests in the Independence Day Programme of the Panchayat.
Friends, these colors of the Amrit Mahotsav were seen not only in India, but also in other countries of the world. Local singers living in Botswana sang 75 patriotic songs to celebrate 75 years of India’s independence. What is more special in this is that these 75 songs were sung in languages ​​like Hindi, Punjabi, Gujarati, Bangla, Assamese, Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Sanskrit. Similarly, in Namibia, a special stamp has been released on the Indo-Namibian cultural-traditional relations.
Friends, I want to share with you another thing of joy. Just a few days ago, I got an opportunity to attend a program of Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. There, they had organised the screening of ‘Swaraj’, the Doordarshan serial. I got an opportunity to attend its premiere . This is a great initiative to acquaint the younger generation of the country with the efforts of unsung heroes and heroines who took part in the freedom movement. It is telecast every Sunday at 9 pm on Doordarshan. And I was told that is going to continue for 75 weeks. I urge you to take time out to watch it yourself and do show it to the children of the house. And people from schools-colleges can also record it and compose a special program when the school-college opens on Monday, so that a new awakening will arise in our country about these great heroes of the birth of Freedom. The Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav will continue till next year i.e. August 2023. For the country, for the freedom fighters, the writings and events that we have been organising, we have to carry them forward.
My dear countrymen, the knowledge of our forefathers, the farsightedness of our ancestors and the EkAtmaChintan, integral self realisation is so significant even today; when we go deep into it, we are filled with wonder. Our thousands of years old Rigveda! In Rigveda it is said:-
Oman-mapo manushi: amritkam dhaat tokay tanayaaya shyamyo: |
Yooyam Hisatha Bhishjo Matritama Vishwasya Sthatu: Jagato Janitri: ||
Meaning – O water, you are the best friend of humanity. You are the giver of life, food is produced from you, and from you is the well-being of our children. You are the protector of us and keep us away from all evils. You are the best medicine, and you are the sustainer of this universe.
Think about it…the importance of water and water conservation has been explained in our culture thousands of years ago. When we see this knowledge in today’s context, we are thrilled, but when the nation accepts this knowledge as its strength, then their power increases manifold. You will remember, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I had talked about Amrit Sarovar four months ago. After that, the local administration got active in different districts, voluntary organizations came together and local people connected… – and Lo & behold, the construction of Amrit Sarovars has become a mass movement. When there is a deep feeling to do something for the country, realize one’s duties, concern for the coming generations, then the capabilities also get added up, and the resolve becomes noble.
I have come to know of a brilliant effort from Warangal in Telangana. A new Gram Panchayat has been formed here, named ‘Mangtya-Valya Thanda’. This village is close to the Forest Area. There was a place near the village where a lot of water used to accumulate during monsoon. On the initiative of the villagers, this place is now being developed under the Amrit Sarovar campaign. This time due to the rains during the monsoon, this lake has been filled to the brim with water.
I also want to tell you about the Amrit Sarovar built in Mocha Gram Panchayat in Mandla, Madhya Pradesh. This Amrit Sarovar is built near the Kanha National Park and has further enhanced the beauty of this area. The newly constructed Shaheed Bhagat Singh Amrit Sarovar in Lalitpur, Uttar Pradesh is also drawing a lot of people. This lake, built in the Niwari Gram Panchayat, is spread over 4 acres. The tree plantation on the shoreline of the lake is enhancing its beauty. People are also coming from far and wide to see the 35 feet high tricolor near the lake. This campaign of Amrit Sarovars is going on in full swing in Karnataka as well. Here in the village ‘Bilkerur’ of Bagalkot district, people have built a very beautiful Amrit Sarovar. In fact, in this area, people had a lot of problems because of the water flowing down from the mountain; farmers and their crops also suffered losses. To make the Amrit Sarovar, the people of the village channelized all the water and brought it aside. This also solved the problem of floods in the area. The Amrit Sarovar Abhiyan not only solves many of our problems today; it is equally necessary for our coming generations. Under this campaign, at many places, old water bodies are also being rejuvenated. Amrit Sarovars are being used for quenching the thirst of animals as well as for farming. Due to these ponds, the ground water table of the surrounding areas has risen. At the same time, greenery is also increasing around them. Not only this, people at many places are also engaged in preparations for fish farming in Amrit Sarovars. I urge all of you, especially my young friends, to actively participate in the Amrit Sarovar campaign and lend full strength to these efforts of water conservation & water storage and take them forward.
My dear countrymen, an interesting project is being run in Bongai village of Assam – Project Sampoorna. The purpose of this project is to fight against malnutrition and the method too is very unique. Under this, the mother of a healthy child from an Anganwadi center meets the mother of a malnourished child every week and discusses all the nutrition related information. That is, one mother becomes a friend of another mother, helps her, and teaches her. With the help of this project, in this region, in one year, malnutrition has been eradicated in more than 90 percent children.
Can you imagine, whether song and music and bhajans can also be used to remove malnutrition? It was successfully used in “Mera Bachha Campaign”; the “Mera Bachha Abhiyan” in Datia district of Madhya Pradesh. Under this, bhajan-kirtans were organized in the district, in which teachers as nutrition gurus were called. A Matka program was also held, in which women bring a handful of grains to the Anganwadi center and with this grain, a ‘Balbhoj’ is organized on Saturdays. Besides this increase in the attendance of children in Anganwadi centers, malnutrition has also shown a dip. A unique campaign is also going on in Jharkhand to increase awareness about malnutrition. A snake-ladder game has been prepared in Giridih, Jharkhand. Through play, children learn about good and bad habits.
Friends, I am telling you about so many innovative experiments related to malnutrition, because all of us also have to join this campaign in the coming month. The month of September is dedicated to festivals as well as a big campaign related to nutrition. We celebrate the Poshan Maah every year from the 1st to the 30th of September. Many creative and diverse efforts are being made all over the country against malnutrition. Better use of technology and also public participation has become an important part of the Nutrition campaign. From providing mobile devices to millions of Anganwadi workers in the country, a Poshan Tracker has also been launched to monitor the accessibility of Anganwadi services. In all the Aspirational Districts and the states of the North East, 14 to 18 year old daughters have also been brought under the purview of the POSHAN Abhiyaan. The solution to the malady of malnutrition is not limited just to these steps – in this fight, many other initiatives also play an important role. For example, take the Jal Jeevan Mission…this mission is also going to have a huge impact in making India malnutrition free. Efforts for social awareness play an important role in tackling the challenges of malnutrition. I would urge all of you in the coming nutrition month, to take part in the efforts to eradicate malnutrition.
My dear countrymen, Sridevi Varadarajan ji from Chennai has sent me a reminder. She has written something like this on MyGov – There are less than 5 months left for the New Year to come, and we all know that the ensuing New Year will be celebrated as the International Year of Millets. She has also sent me a millet map of the country. She’s also asked if you could discuss this in the upcoming episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. It gives me immense happiness to see this kind of spirit in my countrymen. You will remember that the United Nations has passed a resolution declaring the year 2023 as the International Year of Millets. You will also be very happy to know that this proposal of India had been accepted by more than 70 countries.
Today, around the world, craze for these very coarse grains, millets, is rising. Friends, when I talk about coarse grains, I want to share one of my efforts with you today. For the last some time, when any foreign guests come to India, when Heads of State comes to India, it is my endeavor to get dishes made from the millets of India, that is, our coarse grains in the banquets. And the experience has been that these dignitaries have very much relished them and they also try to collect a lot of information about our coarse grains, about Millets. Millets, coarse grains, have been a part of our Agriculture, Culture and Civilization since ancient times. Millets are mentioned in our Vedas, and similarly, they are also mentioned in Purananuru and Tolkappiyam. If you go to any part of the country, you will definitely find different types of Millets in the food of the people there. In millets too, just like our culture, a lot of diversity is found. Jowar, Bajra, Ragi, Sawan, Kangni, Cheena, Kodo, Kutki, Kuttu, all these are just Millets. India is the largest producer of Millets in the world; hence the responsibility of making this initiative a success also rests on the shoulders of us Indians. Together we all have to make it a mass movement, and also increase the awareness of Millets among the people of the country. And friends, you know very well, millets are also beneficial for the farmers and especially the small farmers. In fact, the crop gets ready in a very short time, and does not require much water either.
For our small farmers, millets are especially beneficial. Millet hay is also considered the best fodder. Nowadays, the young generation is much focused on Healthy Living and Eating. Even if you look at it this way, millets contain plenty of protein, fiber, and minerals. Many people even call it a Superfood. Millets have many benefits, not just one. Along with reducing obesity, they also reduce the risk of diabetes, hypertension and heart related diseases. Along with that, they are also helpful in preventing stomach and liver ailments. We referred to malnutrition, just a while ago. Millets are also very beneficial in fighting malnutrition, since they are packed with energy as well as protein. Today a lot is being done to promote Millets in the country. Along with focusing on research and innovation related to this, FPOs are being encouraged, so that, production can be increased. It is my request to my farmer brothers and sisters to adopt Millets, that is, coarse grains, more and more and benefit from it. It feels good to see that many such start-ups are emerging today, which are working on Millets. Some of these are making Millet Cookies, while some are also making Millet Pancakes and Dosa. There are some who are making Millet Energy Bars, and Millet Breakfasts. I wish all the very best to all the people working in this field. In this festive season, we also use Millets in most of the dishes. You must share the pictures of such delicacies made in your homes on social media, so that it helps in increasing awareness among people about Millets.
My dear countrymen, just a few days ago, I saw news from Jorsing village in Siang district of Arunachal Pradesh. This news was about a change that the people of this village had been waiting for, for many years. In fact, in Jorsing village this month, 4G internet services have started from Independence Day. Like, earlier people used to be happy when electricity reached the village; now, in new India, the same happiness is felt when 4G reaches there. There has been a new sunrise in the form of 4G in the remote areas of Arunachal and North East; internet connectivity has brought a new dawn. Facilities which were once available only in big cities, have been brought to every village through Digital India. For this reason, new digital entrepreneurs are rising in the country. Setha Singh Rawat ji of Ajmer district of Rajasthan runs ‘Darzi Online’, an’E-store’. You will wonder what is Darzi online! Actually, Setha Singh Rawat used to do tailoring work before Covid. When Covid came, Rawat ji did not take this challenge as a difficulty; rather as an opportunity. He joined the ‘common service centre’ i.e. CSC E-Store, and started working online. He saw that customers were placing orders for masks in large numbers. He hired some women and started getting masks made. After this he started his online store named ‘Darzi Online’ in which he started selling stitched clothes of many other kinds. Today, with the power of Digital India, the work of Setha Singh ji has increased so much, that now he gets orders from all over the country. He has given employment to hundreds of women here. Digital India has also turned Om Prakash Singh ji of Unnao, UP into a digital entrepreneur. He has established more than one thousand broadband connections in his village. Om Prakash ji has also built a free wifi zone around his common service centre, which is helping the needy people a lot. Om Prakash ji’s work has increased so much that he has hired more than 20 people. These people are providing broadband connection to the schools, hospitals, tehsil offices and Anganwadi centers of the villages and are also getting employment from it. Like the common service center, there are many such success stories are being seen on the Government E-market place i.e. GEM portal.
Friends, I get many such messages from villages, which share with me the changes brought about by the internet. The internet has changed the way our young friends study and learn. For example, when Gudiya Singh of UP came to her in-laws’ house in Amoiya village of Unnao, she was worried about her studies. But, BharatNet resolved her concern. Gudiya carried on her studies through the internet, and also completed her graduation. How many such lives in villages are getting new strength from the Digital India campaign. Do write to me as much as you can about the Digital Entrepreneurs of the villages, and also share their success stories on social media.
My dear countrymen, sometime back, I received a letter from Ramesh ji, a listener of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ from Himachal Pradesh. Ramesh ji has enumerated many specialities of the hills in his letter. He wrote that the settlements on the mountains might be far apart, but the hearts of the people are very close to each other. Indeed, we can learn a lot from the lives of the people living in the hills. The first lesson we get from the lifestyle and culture of the hills is that if we do not come under the pressure of circumstances, we can easily overcome them, and secondly, how we can become self-sufficient with local resources. The first lesson that I mentioned, a beautiful picture of it is being seen in the Spiti region these days. Spiti is a tribal area. Here, these days, pea plucking goes on. This is a laborious and difficult task on hill farms. But here, the women of the village gather, and together, pluck peas from each other’s fields. Along with this task, women also sing the local song ‘Chhapra Majhi Chhapra’. That is, mutual cooperation here is also a part of folk tradition. The best example of utilization of local resources is also found in Spiti. Farmers who rear cows in Spiti, dry up the dung and fill it in sacks. When winter comes, these sacks are laid out in the sheds where the cows live, which is called khud here. During snowfall, these sacks give protection to the cows from the cold. After winters, this cow dung is used as manure in the fields. That is, the animals’ protection using animal waste, and also manure for the fields. The cost of cultivation is also low, and the yield in the fields is also high. That is why this area, these days, is also becoming an inspiration for natural farming.
Friends, many such commendable efforts are also being seen in our, other hill state, Uttarakhand. Many types of medicines and plants are found in Uttarakhand, which are very beneficial for our health. One of them is the fruit – Bedu. It is also known as Himalayan Fig. In this fruit, minerals and vitamins are found in abundance. People consume it not only in the form of fruit, but it is also used in the treatment of many diseases. In view of these qualities of this fruit, now the juice of Bedu, jams, chutneys, pickles and dry fruits prepared by drying them have been launched in the market. With the initiative of the Pithoragarh administration and the cooperation of the local people, it has been successful in bringing Bedu to the market in different forms. Bedu has also been launched in the online market by branding it as Pahari Fig. Due to this, farmers have not only found a new source of income, but the benefits of the medicinal properties of Bedu have started reaching far and wide as well.
My dear countrymen, in the beginning of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, today, we referred to the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav. Along with the great festival of Independence Day, many more festivals are lined up in the coming days. Just a few days from now, is the festival of Ganesh Chaturthi, the festival of worship of Bhagwan Ganesha. Ganesh Chaturthi, that is, the festival of blessings of Ganpati Bappa. The festival of Onam is also commencing before Ganesh Chaturthi. Onam, especially in Kerala, will be celebrated with a sense of peace and prosperity. Hartalika Teej too is on the 30th of August. The festival of Nuakhai will also be celebrated in Odisha on the 1st of September. Nuakhai simply means new food, that is, this too, like many other festivals, is a festival associated with our agricultural traditions. Meanwhile, there will also be the Samvatsari festival of the Jain community. All these festivals of ours are synonymous with our cultural prosperity and vitality. I wish you all the best for these festivals and special occasions. Along with these festivals, tomorrow on the 29th of August, National Sports Day will also be celebrated on the birth anniversary of Major Dhyanchand ji. May our young sportspersons continue to raise the glory of our tricolor on global forums, this will be our tribute to Dhyan Chand ji. Let us all keep working together for the country like this; keep raising the honor of the country…With this wish I conclude my point. Next month, we will have ‘Mann Ki Baat’ once again.
Thank you very much!


93. SEPTEMBER 25, 2022
My dear countrymen, Namaskar!
The topic that grabbed our attention in the last few days is the Cheetah. There have been a lot of messages to talk about cheetahs. Be it Arun Kumar Gupta of Uttar Pradesh or N. Ramachandran Raghuram ji of Telangana, be it Rajan ji of Gujarat or Subrata ji of Delhi, people from all corners of the country have expressed happiness over the return of cheetahs to India. 130 crore Indians are happy, full of pride; this is India’s love for nature. A common question posed by people about this is “Modi ji, when will we get an opportunity to see the cheetahs?”
Friends, a task force have been formed. This task force will monitor the cheetahs and see how much they have been able to adapt to the environment here. On this basis a decision will be taken after a few months and then you will be able to see the cheetahs. But till then I am assigning some work to all of you. For this, a competition will be organized on the MyGov platform, in which I urge people to share certain things. What should be the name of the campaign that we are running on cheetahs? Can we even think of naming all these cheetahs…. by what name should each of them be called? By the way, if this naming is of traditional nature, then it will be very nice since, anything related to our society and culture, tradition and heritage, draws us easily. Not only that, you should also share how humans should behave with animals! Even in our fundamental duties, emphasis has been laid on Respect for Animals. I appeal to all of you to participate in this competition. Who knows…you may be the first to get anopportunity to see a cheetah as a reward!
My dear countrymen, today the 25th of September is celebrated as the birthday of Deendayal Upadhyay ji, the brilliant humanist, thinker and great son of the country. The more the youth of any country take pride in their identity and honour, the more their original ideas and philosophies attract them. The biggest feature of Deendayal ji’s thoughts is that in his lifetime, he had seen the great upheavals of the world. He had become a witness to the struggles of ideologies. That is why, he put forward an idea of ​​’Ekatma Manavdarshan’ and ‘Antyodaya’ before the country which was completely Indian. Deendayal ji’s ‘Ekatma Manavdarshan’ is such an idea, which in the realm of ideology gives freedom from conflict and prejudice. He again put forth to the world, the Indian philosophy which considers human beings equal. It has been said in our scriptures – ‘Atmavat Sarvabhuteshu’, that is, we should treat living beings akin to us and similarlytreatthem such. Deendayal ji taught us how Indian philosophy can guide the world even in the modern, social and political perspective. In a way, he awakened our intellectual consciousness by freeing us from the inferiority complex that prevailed in the country after independence. He also used to say – ‘Our freedom can be meaningful only when it expresses our culture and identity’. On the basis of this idea, he had created a vision for the development of the country. Deendayal Upadhyay ji used to say that the measure of the progress of the country is the person at the loweststep. In the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, the more we know Deendayal ji, the more we learn from him, the more we will get inspiration to take the country forward.
My dear countrymen, three days later, that is, on the 28th of September, is a special day of Amrit Mahotsav. On this day we will celebrate the birth anniversary of Bhagat Singh ji, the brave son of Mother India. Just before the birth anniversary of Bhagat Singh, an important decision has been taken as a tribute to him. It has been decided that the Chandigarh airport will now be named after Shaheed Bhagat Singh. It had been in the waiting for a long time. I congratulate the people of Chandigarh, Punjab, and Haryana and of the entire country for this decision.
Friends, let us take inspiration from our freedom fighters, following their ideals and build the India of their dreams… this is our tribute to them. The memorials of martyrs, the names of places and institutions named after them inspire us with a sense of duty. Just a few days ago, the country has made a similar effort by setting up the statue of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose on Kartavya Path and now the name of Chandigarh Airport after Shaheed Bhagat Singh is another step in that direction. I wish, the way in which we are celebrating special occasions related to freedom fighters during the Amrit Mahotsav, in the same way every youth must try something new on the 28th of September.
By the way, my dear countrymen, all of you have another reason to celebrate the 28th of September. Do you know what it is? I will say only two words and I know your enthusiasm will increase fourfold.
These two words are – Surgical Strike!
Hasn’t the Josh risen!! Let us celebrate the campaign of the ongoing Amrit Mahotsav in our country with full enthusiasm, sharing our happiness with everyone.
My dear countrymen, it is said – no obstacle can stand in the way of a person who has been forged by the struggles of life. In our everyday life, we also see some friends who are coping with some physical challenge or the other. There are many people who are either unable to hear, or are unable to express themselves through speech. The biggest support for such friends is Sign Language. But a big problem in India for years was that there were no clear gestures, no standards for Sign Language. To overcome these difficulties, the Indian Sign Language Research and Training Center was established in the year 2015. I am happy that this institution has thus far prepared a dictionary comprising ten thousand words and expressions. Two days ago i.e. on the 23rd of September, on the Sign Language Day, many school courses have also been launched in Sign Language. A lot of emphasis has also been given in the National Education Policy to maintain a fixed standard for Sign Language. It is being further disseminated, even by making videos of the dictionary of Sign Language. On YouTube, many people, many institutions, have started their channels in Indian Sign Language, that is, the campaign that started in the country about Sign Language 7-8 years ago, is benefitting millions of my specially-abled brothers and sisters now. Pooja ji, who hails from Haryana, is very happy with the Indian Sign Language. Earlier she was not able to communicate with her son, but after going through Sign Language training in 2018, the lives of both mother and son have become easier. Pooja ji’s son also learned Sign Language and in his school he won a prize in storytelling as well. Similarly, Tinkaji has a six-year-old daughter who cannot hear. Tinkaji had made her daughter undergo a Sign Language course but she herself did not know Sign Language, and hence she could not communicate with her daughter. Now Tinkaji has also undergone sign language training and thus both mother and daughter now converse a lot among themselves. Manju ji of Kerala has also benefited a lot from these efforts. Manju jiis not able to hear since birth. Not only that, this has been the situation in the lives of her parents as well. In such a situation, sign language has become a means of communication for the whole family. Now Manju ji herself has decided to become a Sign Language teacher.
Friends, I am also discussing about this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ so that the awareness about Indian Sign Language increases. With this, we will be able to help our specially-abled friends more and more. Brothers and sisters, a few days ago, I got a copy of the Hemkosh too written in Braille. Hemkosh is one of the oldest dictionaries of Assamese language. It was prepared in the 19th century. It was edited by eminent linguist Hemchandra Barua ji. The Braille Edition of Hemkosh is around 10,000 pages long and is going to be published in more than 15 volumes. In this, more than 1 lakh words have to be translated. I greatly appreciate this sensitive effort. Every such effort goes a long way in increasing the skill and capability of our specially-abled friends. Today India is also raising the flag of success in Para Sports. We have all been witness to this in many tournaments. Today there are many people who are engaged in promoting the fitness culture among the specially-abled at the grassroots level. This imparts a lot of strength to the self-confidence of the specially-abled.
My dear countrymen, a few days ago, I just met a girl from Surat, Anvi. My meeting with Anvi and Anvi’s yoga has been so memorable that I want to tell all the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ about it. Friends, Anvi is afflicted with Down’s Syndrome since birth and she has also been battling with serious heart disease since childhood. She also had to undergo open heart surgery when she was only three months old. Despite all these difficulties, neither Anvi, nor her parents ever gave up. Anvi’s parents gathered all the information about Down’s syndrome and then decided on the way to reduce Anvi’s dependence on others. They started teaching Anvi how to lift a glass of water, how to tie shoe laces, how to button clothes; small things such as those. What the appropriate place of things is, what the good habits are, they tried to teach Anvi all this with a lot of patience. The way daughter Anvi showed her will to learn, displayed her talent, her parents also got a lot of encouragement. They inspired Anvi to learn yoga. The problem was so serious, that Anvi could not even stand on her own two feet…In such a situation, her parents inspired Anvi to learn yoga. When she went to the Yoga coach for the first time, the coach too was in a dilemma whether this innocent girl would be able to do yoga! But even the coach probably had no idea of ​​what stuff Anvi was made of. She started practicing yoga with her mother and now she has become an expert in yoga. Today Anvi participates in competitions across the country and wins medals. Yoga gave a new life to Anvi. Anvi assimilated yoga and imbibed life. Anvi’s parents told me that yoga has brought amazing changes in Anvi’s life… Now her self-confidence has become remarkable. Yoga has also improved Anvi’s physical health and the need for medicines is also lessening. I would like that the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ in the country and abroad do a scientific study of the benefits of yoga to Anvi. I think Anvi is a good case study, for those who want to test the power of yoga. Such scientists should come forward with studies based on Anvi’s success and introduce the world to the power of yoga. Any such research could be of great help to children afflicted with Down’s syndrome around the world. Now, the world has accepted that yoga is very effective for physical and mental wellness. Especially in problems related to diabetes and blood pressure, yoga helps a lot. In view of such power of yoga, the United Nations had decided to celebrate the International Yoga Day on the 21st of June. Now, United Nations has recognized and honored another effort of India. This is an effort, started in the year 2017 – the “India Hypertension Control Initiative”. Under this, lakhs of people suffering from blood pressure problems are being treated in government wellness centers. The way this initiative has attracted the attention of international organizations is unprecedented. It is a matter of encouragement for all of us that out of those who have been treated, about half of them are having their blood pressure under control. I congratulate all the people working for this initiative, who made it a success with their untiring hard work.
Friends, the evolutionary journey of human life has been continuously connected with water – be it seas, rivers or ponds. India is also fortunate that due to the long coastline of more than seven and a half thousand kilometers (7500 km), our bond with the sea has remained unbroken. This coastal border passes through many states and islands. India’s culture, full of different communities and diversity can be seen flourishing here. Not only that, the cuisine of these coastal areas attracts a lot of people. But along with these interesting things, there is also a sad side. These coastal areas of ours are facing many environmental challenges. Climate Change remains a major threat to Marine Eco-Systems.On the other hand, the litter spread on our beaches is disturbing. It becomes our responsibility to make serious and continuous efforts for these challenges. Here I would like to talk about an effort of Coastal Cleaning in the coastal areas of the country ‘Swachh Sagar – Surakshit Sagar’. This campaign, which started on the 5th of July culminated on the 17thof September, the day of Vishwakarma Jayanti. This day was also Coastal Clean Up Day. This campaign which started in the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav lasted for 75 days. Public participation in this was a sight to behold. During this effort, many cleanliness related programs were seen for the entire two and a half months. A long human chain was made in Goa. During the Ganpati immersion in Kakinada, people were told about the harm caused by plastic. About 5000 young friends from the NSS collected more than 30 tonnes of plastic. Within three days in Odisha, more than 20 thousand school students took a pledge that they would inspire their family and people along with them as well, for the Swachh Sagar – Surakshit Sagar initiative. I would like to congratulate all the people who took part in this campaign.
When I interact with Elected Officials, especially the mayors of cities and sarpanches of villages, I urge them to include Local Communities and Local Organizations in efforts like cleanliness as well as adopt innovative methods.
There is a team in Bangalore – Youth for Parivartan. For the last eight years, this team has been working on cleanliness and other community activities. Their motto is very clear – ‘Stop Complaining, Start Acting’. This team has so far beautified more than 370 places across the city. The campaign of Youth for Parivartan has connected 100 to 150 (150) citizens at every place. Every Sunday this program starts in the morning and continues till noon. In this task, not only is the garbage lifted, the work of painting the walls and making artistic sketches is also done. At many places, you can also see sketches of famous people and inspirational quotes by them. Following upon the efforts of Youth For Parivartan of Bangalore, I would also like to tell you about the ‘Kabaad se Jugaad’ campaign of Meerut. This campaign is related to the protection of the environment as well as the beautification of the city. The special thing about this campaign is that, in this, waste such as iron scrap, plastic waste, old tires and drums are used. This campaign is also an example of how to beautify public places at a low cost. I appreciate all the people involved in this campaign from the core of my heart.
My dear countrymen, at this time there is a festive spirit all around the country. Tomorrow is the first day of Navaratri. In this, we will worship the first avatar of Goddess ‘Maa Shailputri’. From here, there will be nine days of self discipline, restraint and fasting, then there will also be the festival of Vijayadashami. That is, if we look at it in a way, we will find that along with faith and spirituality, how a profound message is hidden in our festivals. The attainment of ‘Siddhi’ through discipline and restraint, and then the festival of victory, that’s the way to achieve any goal in life. After Dussehra, the festival of Dhanteras and Diwaliwill follow.
Friends, during the past years, a new resolution of the country has also been associated with our festivals. You all know, this is the resolution of ‘Vocal for Local’. We now include our local artisans, craftsmen and traders in the joy of festivals. On the occasion of Bapu’s birth anniversary on the 2nd of October, we have to take a pledge to intensify this campaign. Khadi, handloom, handicrafts…along with all these products, you must buy local goods. After all, the true joy of this festival is also when everyone becomes a part of it. Therefore, people associated with the work of local products also have to be supported by us. A good way is to include these type of products in whatever gifts we give during the festival.
At this time, this campaign is also special because during the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, we are also onwards with the goal of a self-reliant India. Which, in the real sense, will be a true tribute to the freedom fighters. That’s why I request you to break all the records this time to buy these products of Khadi, handloom or handicrafts. We have seen that polythene bags are also being used a lot for packing and packaging during festivals. The harmful litter of polythene on the festivals observing cleanliness is also against the spirit of our festivals. Therefore, we should use only locally made non-plastic bags. The trend of jute, cotton, banana fibre, many such traditional bags is on the rise once again. It is our duty to promote them on the occasion of festivals, and take care of our health and environment along with cleanliness.
My dear countrymen, it is said in our scriptures –  ‘Parhit Saris Dharam Nahi Bhai’
That is, there is no other Dharma like doing good to others, serving others, doing charity. Recently, in the country, another glimpse of this spirit of social service was seen. You must have also seen that people are coming forward and are adopting one TB patient or the other, taking the lead in ensuring a nutritious diet. Actually, it is a part of the TB Free India campaign, whose basis is public participation; a sense of duty. It is possible to cure TB with the right nutrition, with the right medicines at the right time. I believe that with this power of public participation, India will definitely be free from TB by the year 2025.
Friends, I have also come to know such an example from the Union Territories of Dadra-Nagar Haveli and Daman-Diu, which touches the heart. Jinu Rawatiya ji, who lives in a tribal area here, has written that under the ongoing village adoption program, students of the medical college have adopted 50 villages. It also includes the village of Jinu Ji. These medical students make the people of the village aware to avoid illness, also help in the recuperation, and also impart information about the schemes of the government. This spirit of philanthropy has brought new joy in the lives of the people living in the villages. I congratulate all the students of the medical college for this endeavor.
Friends, a variety of  new topics are being discussed in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Many times, through this program, we get an opportunity to delve into the depth of some old subjects. Last month in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I discussed about coarse cereals, and celebrating the year 2023 as ‘International Millet Year’. People are very curious about this topic. I have received many such letters in which people have written how they have made millets a part of their daily diet. Some people have also referred to traditional dishes made from millets. These are signs of a big change. Seeing this enthusiasm of people, I think that we should prepare an e-book together, in which people can share their experiences and dishes made from millets, so that, before the start of the International Millet Year, we will have a publicencyclopediabased on millets which can be published on the MyGov portal.
Friends, that’s all this time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, but before I leave, I want to tell you about the National Games as well. National Games are being organized in Gujarat from the 29th of September. This is a very special occasion, because the National Games are being organized after many years. The previous events had to be canceled due to the Covid pandemic. My very best wishes to every player who takes part in this sports meet. To raise the enthusiasm of the players on this day, I will be in their midst. All of you must also follow the National Games and encourage our players. I now take leave of you. We will meet again next month with new topics in ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Dhanyavaad, Namaskar!


94. OCTOBER 30, 2022
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today, ‘Chhath’, the great festival of sun worship is being celebrated in many parts of the country. Lakhs of devotees have reached their villages, their homes, their families to be a part of the ‘Chhath’ festival. I pray that Chhath Maiya bless everyone with prosperity and well being.
Friends, the tradition of worshiping the Sun is a proof of how deep our culture, our faith, is related to nature. Through this puja the importance of sunlight in our life has been illustrated. Along with this, the message has also been conveyed that ups and downs are an integral part of life. Therefore, we should maintain a uniform poise have in every situation. Various fruits and Thekua are offered in the worship of Chhath Maiya. The fasting in this is also not less than any difficult sadhna. Another special thing about Chhath Puja is that the items used for worship are prepared by myriad people of the society together. In this, a basket or supli made of bamboo is used. Earthen lamps have their own significance. Through this, the importance of farmers who grow gram and small entrepreneurs making batashas has been established in the society. Without their cooperation, the worship of Chhath, simply cannot be completed. The festival of Chhath also emphasizes on the importance of cleanliness in our lives. On the arrival of this festival, roads, rivers, ghats, various sources of water, all are cleaned at the community level. The festival of Chhath is also an example of ‘Ek Bharat- Shrestha Bharat’. Today, wherever the people of Bihar and Purvanchal are in any corner of the country, Chhath is being celebrated with great pomp. Chhath is now getting organized on a large scale in different districts of Maharashtra along with Delhi, Mumbai and many parts of Gujarat. I do remember that earlier in Gujarat, Chhath Pooja was not performed to this extent.But with the passage of time, the colors of Chhath Puja have started getting dissolved in almost the whole of Gujarat. I am also very happy to see this. Nowadays we see, how many grand pictures of Chhath Puja come from abroad too. That is, the rich heritage of India, our faith, is re-inforcing its identity in every corner of the world. My best wishes to every devotee who is participating in this great festival.
My dear countrymen, we have just talked about the holy Chhath Puja, the worship of Lord Surya. So today, along with worshiping the Sun, why not also discuss his boon! This blessing of Sun God is – ‘Solar Energy’. Solar Energy is a subject today, in which the whole world is looking at its future and for India, the Sun God has not only been worshiped for centuries, but has also been the focus of our way of life. Today, India is combining its traditional experiences with modern science, that is why, today, we have become one of the largest countries to generate electricity from solar energy. How solar energy is changing the lives of the poor and middle class of our country is also a subject of study.
In Tamil Nadu, there is a farmer in Kancheepuram, Thiru K. Ezilon. He took the benefit of ‘PM Kusum Yojana’ and got a solar pumpset of ten horsepower installed in his farm. Now they do not have to spend anything on electricity for their farm. They are not even dependent on the government’s electricity supply for irrigation in the field any more. Similarly, in Bharatpur, Rajasthan, another beneficiary farmer of ‘KusumYojana’ is – Kamalji Meena. Kamal ji installed a solar pump in the field, due to which his expenses have come down. Since the expense has come down, the income also has increased. Kamalji is also connecting many other small industries with solar electricity. There is timber work in their area, there are products made from cow dung and solar electricity is also being used in them.
They are also giving employment to 10-12 people, that is, the fragrance of Kamalji’s initiative that started with Kusum Yojana, has started reaching many people.
Friends, can you ever imagine that on using electricity for a month, instead of getting your electricity bill, you get paid for electricity ? Solar energy has also demonstrated that. A few days ago, you must have heard a lot about the country’s first Solar Village – Modhera of Gujarat! Most of the houses in Modhera Surya Gram have started generating electricity from solar power. Now in many houses there, there is no electricity bill at the end of the month; instead, a check from the electricity income is being generated. Seeing this happen, now people of many villages of the country are writing letters to me stating that their village should also be converted into Surya Gram, that is, the day is not far when the construction of Suryagrams in India will become a big mass movement and the people of Modhera village have already begun that.
Let us also introduce the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to the people of Modhera. Shriman Vipinbhai Patel is at the moment with us on the phone line.
Prime Minister :- Look, now Modhera is being discussed as a model for the whole country. But when all your relatives and acquaintances ask you, what do you tell them, what have the benefits been?
Vipinji :- Sir, when people ask us, we say that whatever bill we used to get, that is now zero and sometimes it comes to 70 rupees, but the economic condition in our entire village is improving.
Prime Minister :- That is, in a way, the earlier concern of electricity bill is over!
Vipinji :- Yes sir, that is correct sir. Now there is no tension in the whole village. Everyone is feeling that what Sir has done, he has done very well. Everyone is happy Sir. All are delighted.
Prime Minister: – Now they themselves have become the owners of the electricity factory in their own houses. Electricity is being generated on the roof of their own houses.
Vipinji :- Yes sir, it is right sir.
Prime Minister :- So what is the effect of this change on the people of the village?
Vipinji:- Sir, the people of the whole village, they are into agriculture, so we have got rid of electricity hassles. No electricity bill is not to be paid, they have become free of worries.
Prime Minister :- Meaning, the electricity bill has also gone and the convenience has increased.
Vipinji :- The hassles are over Sir and Sir, when you had come here and that 3D show which you inaugurated here, after that the glory of Modhera village has grown manifold. And the secretary who had come sir…
Prime Minister :- Yes sir…
Vipinji :- So the village became famous sir.
Prime Minister :- Yes, it was the wish of the Secretary General of the UN himself. He urged me a lot that you have done such a great work, so I want to go there and see.
Prime Minister :- Fine, Vipin Bhai, I wish you and all the people of your village many best wishes and the world should take inspiration from you and this solar energy campaign should reach every home.
Vipinji :- Alright sir. We will tell all of them Sir, to get solar installed, even with your own money,… even then, there is a lot of benefit.
Prime Minister :- Yes, make the people understand. Wish you the very best. Thanks brother!
Vipinji :- Thank you sir, Thank you sir, my life feels blessed, talking to you.
Prime Minister :- Many thanks to Vipinbhai.
Let us now also talk to Varsha Behen in Modhera village.
Varshaben :- Hello! Namaste sir!
Prime Minister :- Namaste-Namaste Varshaben | how are you
Varshaben :- We are very good sir. How are you ?
Prime Minister :- I am very fine.
Varshaben :- We are blessed to talk to you sir.
Prime Minister :- Okay Varshaben !
Varshaben :- Yes.
Prime Minister:- You are in Modhera…, you are from a military family.
Varshaben :- I am from military family. This is an ex Army man’s wife speaking sir.
Prime Minister :- So where all did you get a chance to go in India earlier?
Varshaben :- I got a chance to stay together in Rajasthan, in Gandhi Nagar, Kachra Kanjhor in Jammu. There were a lot of facilities available there sir.
Prime Minister :- Yes. Being part of the army, you are also speaking Hindi well.
Varshaben :- Yes-yes. I have learned.
Prime Minister :- Tell me, the big transformation that came in Modhera, you got this Solar Rooftop Plant installed. What people might be saying in the beginning, then it must have come to your mind, what that meant? What are you doing ?what will happen ? How can electricity come this way? These are all things that must have come to your mind. What is your experience now? What is the benefit of this?
Varshaben:- A lot sir. One benefit after the other sir. Sir, Diwali is celebrated every day in our village because of you. We are getting electricity for 24 hours a day…, there is no bill at all! In our house we have brought all electric appliances in the house sir, we are using everything – because of you sir. Since, there is no bill, we can use everything with free mind.
Prime Minister :- This is true, you have also made up your mind to make maximum use of electricity.
Varshaben :- Indeed Sir! Right now we do not have any problem, we can run all this… washing machine, AC, everything with a free mind, sir!
Prime Minister :- And the rest of the people of the village are also happy because of this?
Varshaben :- Very very happy sir.
Prime Minister:- Well, does your husband work at the Sun Temple there? So the light show that happened there was such a big event and now guests from all over the world are coming.
VarshaBen :- Foreigners from all over the world can come but you have made our village famous in the world.
Prime Minister :- So your husband’s work must have increased now that so many guests are coming there to see the temple.
VarshaBen :- Oh! It doesn’t matter, no matter how much work increases sir, my husband has no problem with that…do go on developing our village.
Prime Minister :- Now we all have to do the development of the village together.
VarshaBen :- Yes, yes. Sir we are with you
Prime Minister :- And I would like to congratulate the people of Modhera because the village accepted this scheme and they were convinced that yes we can make electricity in our house.
Rain Ben -: 24 Hours Sir! We have electricity in our house and we are very happy.
Prime Minister :- Fine! I wish you the very best. The money that is saved, use it for the betterment of the children. Use that money well so that your life benefits. I wish you the very best. And my salutations to all the people of Modhera!
Friends, what Varshaben and Vipin Bhai have mentioned is an inspiration for the whole country, for villages and cities. Modhera’s experience can be replicated across the country. The power of the sun will now save money and increase income. Manzoor Ahmed Larhwal is a friend from Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir. On account of winters in Kashmir, the cost of electricity is high. For this reason, Manzoorji’s electricity bill also used to be more than Rs. 4 thousand, but, since Manzoorji has got a Solar Rooftop Plant installed at his house, his expenditure has come down to less than half. Similarly, KunniDeori, a daughter from Odisha, is making solar energy a medium of employment for her as well as for other women. Kunni lives in Kardapal village of Kendujhar district of Odisha. She trains tribal women to spin silk on a solar-powered reeling machine. Due to the Solar Machine, these tribal women do not have to bear the burden of electricity bill, and they are earning income. This is the very boon of Sun God’s solar energy. The more the boon and the blessings spread, the better it is. Therefore, I urge you to join this and add others too.
My dear countrymen, just now I was talking to you about the sun. Now my attention is going towards space. That is because our country is doing wonders in the solar sector as well as the space sector. The whole world, today, is surprised to see the achievements of India. So I thought, by telling this to the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I should make them happy too.
Friends, you must have seen a few days ago, that India has placed 36 satellites in space simultaneously. This success achieved just a day before Diwali, in a way, it is a special Diwali gift from our youth to the country. With this launching, from Kashmir to Kanyakumari and from Kutch to Kohima, in the whole country, digital connectivity will be further strengthened. With the help of this, even the remotest areas will be more easily connected with the rest of the country. When the country is self-reliant, how, it reaches new heights of success – this is also an example of this. While talking to you, I also remember those old days, when India was denied the Cryogenic Rocket Technology. But the scientists of India not only developed indigenous technology, but today with the help of it, dozens of satellites are being sent to space simultaneously. With this launching, India has emerged as a strong player in the global commercial market…with this, new doors of oppurtunities have also opened up for India.
Friends, our country, which is moving with the resolve of a developed India, can achieve its goals only with the efforts of everyone. Earlier in India, the space sector was confined within the purview of government systems. Since, the space sector was opened for India’s youth and revolutionary changes have started coming in it. Indian industries and start-ups are engaged in bringing new innovations and new technologies in this field. In particular, the collaboration of IN-SPACe is going to make a big difference in this area.
Non-government companies are also getting the facility to launch their payloads and satellites through IN-SPACe. I would urge more and more Start-ups and Innovators to take full advantage of these huge opportunities being created in India in the space sector.
My dear countrymen, when it comes to students, youth power, leadership power, so many outdated stereotypes have become ingrained in our mind. Many times we see that when student power is referred to, its scope is limited by linking it with the student union elections. But the scope of student power is very big, very vast. Student power is the basis of making India powerful. After all, it’s the youth of today, who will take are today will take India till 2047. When India celebrates her centenary, this power of youth, their hard work, their sweat, their talent, will take India to the heights that the country is resolving today. The way our youth of today are working for the country, and have joined nation building, makes me filled with confidence. The way our youth solve problems in hackathons, stay awake all night and work for hours, is very inspiring. A hackathon held in recent years, with lakhs of youth of the country, together have solved many challenges; have given new solutions to the country.
Friends, you may remember, I had called for ‘Jai Anusandhan’ from the Red Fort. I had also talked about making this decade the Techade of India. I loved seeing this; our IIT’s students have also taken over its command. This month on 14-15 October, all 23 IITs came on one platform for the first time to showcase their innovations and research projects. In this fair, students and researchers who came from all over the country, displayed more than 75 best projects. Healthcare, Agriculture, Robotics, Semiconductors, 5G Communications, these projects were made on many such themes. Although all these projects were one better than the other, I want to draw your attention to some projects. For example, a team from IIT Bhubaneswar has developed a portable ventilator for new born babies. It runs on battery and can be used easily in remote areas. This can prove to be very helpful in saving the lives of babies who are born prematurely. Be it electric mobility, drone technology, 5G, many of our students are engaged in developing new technology related to them. Several IITs are also working together on a multilingual project that makes learning local languages easier.
This project will help the new National Education Policy a lot in achieving those goals as well. You will also be happy to know that IIT Madras and IIT Kanpur have played a leading role in preparing India’s indigenous 5G testbed. This is certainly a great start. I hope to see many more such efforts in the times to come. I also hope that taking inspiration from IITs, other institutions will also step up their R&D activities. |
My dear countrymen, sensitivity towards the environment is embedded in every particle of our society and we can feel it all around us. There is no dearth of people in the country who spend a lifetime in the protection of the environment.
We can also learn a lot from Suresh Kumar ji, who lives in Bangaluru, Karnataka, he has a great passion for protecting nature and environment. 20 years ago, he had taken the initiative to rejuvenate a forest of Sahakarnagar in the city. It was a difficult task. But these saplings that were planted 20 years ago have grown into 40 feet tall huge trees. Now their beauty captivates everyone’s mind. This also gives a feeling of great pride to the people living there. Suresh Kumar ji also does another wonderful job. He has also built a bus shelter in Sahakarnagar to promote Kannada language and culture. He has also presented brass plates written in Kannada to hundreds of people. If both Ecology and Culture grow together and flourish…, just imagine how great it would be!
Friends, today more awareness is being seen among people about Eco-friendly living and Eco-friendly products than ever before. I also got a chance to know about one such interesting endeavor from Tamil Nadu. This is a brilliant effort by a team of tribal women in Anaikatti, Coimbatore. These women crafted ten thousand Eco-friendly Terracotta Tea Cups for export. The amazing thing is that these women themselves took up the entire responsibility of making the Terracotta Tea Cups. From Clay Mixing to Final Packaging, they did all the work themselves. They had also taken training for this. Whatever praise is showered on this wonderful effort is little.
Friends, some villages of Tripura have also set very good examples. You must have heard about Bio-Village, but some villages of Tripura have ascended to the level of Bio-Village 2. Bio-Village 2 emphasizes how to minimize the damage caused by natural disasters. In this, full attention is given to improve the quality of life of the people through various measures. There is complete focus on Solar Energy, Biogas, Bee Keeping and Bio Fertilizers. Overall, Bio-Village 2 is going to lend a lot of strength to the campaign against climate change. I am very happy to see the increasing enthusiasm for environmental protection in different parts of the country. A few days ago, in India, Mission Life dedicated to protect the environment has also been launched. The simple principle of Mission Life is – Promote such a lifestyle, which does not harm the environment. I urge you to also know Mission Life and try to adopt it.
Friends, Tomorrow, the 31st of October, is National Unity Day, the auspicious occasion of the birth anniversary of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. On this day, Run for Unity is organized in every corner of the country. This race strengthens the thread of unity in the country, inspires our youth. A few days ago, the same sentiment has been seen during our National Games as well. With the theme ‘Judega India to Jeetega India’, national game, on the one hand, have given a strong message of unity, on the other, have promoted India’s sports culture. You will be happy to know that the National Games this time was the biggest ever organized in India. 36 sports were included in this, in which, 7 new and two indigenous competitions, Yogasan and Mallakhamb were also included. The three teams that were at the fore in winning the Gold Medal are – Services team, Maharashtra and Haryana team. Six National Records and about 60 National Games Records were also made in these games. I congratulate all the players, who won medals, made new records, participated in this sports competition. I also wish these players a bright future.
Friends, I would also like to express my heartfelt appreciation to all those people who contributed in the successful organization of the National Games held in Gujarat. You have seen that in Gujarat the National Games were held during Navratri. Before organizing these games, once it came to my mind that at this time the whole of Gujarat is involved in these festivals, so how will people be able to enjoy these games? Such elaborate arrangement and on the other hand, arrangements for Navratri Garba etc!. How will Gujarat do all this work at the same time? But the people of Gujarat made all the guests happy with their hospitality. The way art, sports and culture came together during the National Games in Ahmedabad, it filled all with joy. While the players also used to participate in the games during the day; in the evening they used to get immersed in the colors of Garba and Dandiya. They also shared a lot of pictures of Gujarati food and Navratri on social media. It was a pleasure for all of us to see. After all, through games like these, one comes to know about the diverse cultures of India. They equally strengthen the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’.
My dear countrymen, on the 15th of November, our country will celebrate the Janjateeya Gaurav Diwas. You will remember, the country started this last year to celebrate the tribal heritage and pride on the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Birsa Munda. Bahgwan BirsaMunda had united millions of people against the British rule in his short lifetime. He had sacrificed his life to protect India’s independence and tribal culture. There is so much that we can learn from Dharti Aba Birsa Munda. Friends, when it comes to Dharti Aba Birsa Munda, let’s look at his short life span; even today we can learn a lot from him and Dharti Aba had said- ‘This earth is ours, we are its protectors.’ There is also a sense of duty for the motherland in this sentence and there is also a feeling of our duty for the environment. He had always emphasized that we should not forget our tribal culture, we should not go far from it at all. Even today, we can learn a lot about nature and environment from the tribal societies of the country.
Friends, Last year on the occasion of the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Birsa Munda, I had the privilege of inaugurating the Bhagwan Birsa Munda Museum in Ranchi. I would like to urge the youth that whenever they get time, they must visit it. I also want to tell you that on November 1, i.e. the day after tomorrow, I shall be at will be at Mangarh, on the border of Gujarat-Rajasthan. Mangarh has had a very special place in India’s freedom struggle and our rich tribal heritage. There was a terrible massacre here in November 1913, in which the British brutally murdered the local tribals. It is said that more than a thousand tribals lost their lives in this massacre. This tribal movement was led by Govind Guru ji, whose life is an inspiration to everyone. Today I bow to all those tribal martyrs and the indomitable courage and valor of Govind Guru ji. The more faithfully we follow the ideals of Bhagwan Birsa Munda, Govind Guru and other freedom fighters during Amrit Kaal, the more our country will touch newer heights.
My dear countrymen, the 8th of November is Gurupurab. As much as the Prakash Parv of Guru Nanak ji is important for our faith, we equally get to learn from it. Throughout his life, Guru Nanak Dev Ji spread light for the sake of humanity. In the last few years, the country has made many efforts to spread the light of Gurus to the masses. We had the privilege of celebrating the 550th Prakash Parv of Guru Nanak DevJi on a large scale in the country and abroad. It is equally pleasant to see the development of the Kartarpur Sahib Corridor after decades of waiting. A few days ago I also got the privilege of laying the foundation stone of the ropeway for Hemkund Sahib. We have to continuously learn from the teachings of our Gurus and remain devoted to them. This day is also Kartik Purnima. On this day, at places of piligrimages, we bathe and perform service and charity. I extend warm greetings to all of you on these festivals. In the coming days, many states will also celebrate their Statehood day. Andhra Pradesh will celebrate its foundation day; Kerala Piravi will be celebrated. Karnataka Rajyotsava will be celebrated. Similarly, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Haryana will also celebrate their Statehood day. I convey my best wishes to the people of all these states. In all our states, the stronger the spirit to learn from each other, to cooperate, and to work together, the more the country will go forward. I am sure we will move forward with the same spirit. You all take care of yourself, stay healthy. I take leave of you till the next episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Namaskar, thanks.


95. NOVEMBER 27, 2022
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
I extend a warm welcome to you all in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, once again. This programmme is the 95th episode. We are fast moving towards the century of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. This programmme is another medium for me to connect with a 130 crore countrymen. Before every episode, reading letters from villages and cities, listening to audio messages from children to elders; it is like a spiritual experience for me.
Friends, I want to start today’s program referring to a unique gift. There is a weaver brother in Rajanna Sircilla district of Telangana – YeldhiHariprasad Garu. He has sent me this G-20 logo woven with his own hands. I was surprised to see this wonderful gift. Hariprasad ji is such an expert in his art that he attracts everyone’s attention. Hariprasad ji has also sent me a letter along with this hand-woven G-20 logo. In this he has written that it is a matter of great pride for India to host the G-20 summit next year. Amid the joy of this achievement of the country, he has prepared this logo of G-20 with his own hands. He has inherited this wonderful talent of weaving from his father and today he is engaged in it with full passion.
Friends, a few days ago I had the privilege of launching the G-20 logo and the website of the Presidency of India. This logo was chosen through a public contest. When I received this gift sent by Hariprasad Garu, another thought came to my mind. I was very happy to see how connected even a person sitting in a district of Telangana could feel with a summit like G-20. Today, many people like Hariprasad Garu have sent letters to me saying that their hearts have swelled with pride at the country hosting such a big summit. I will also mention to you the message of Subba Rao Chillara ji from Pune and Tushar Jagmohan from Kolkata. They have highly appreciated India’s pro-active efforts regarding G-20.
Friends, the G-20 has a partnership comprising two-thirds of the world’s population, three-fourths of world trade, and 85% of world GDP. You can imagine – India is going to preside over such a big group, such a powerful group, 3 days from now i.e. from the 1st of December. What a great opportunity has come for India, for every Indian! This becomes even more special because India was awarded this responsibility during Azadi Ka Amrit Kaal .
Friends, the Presidency of G-20 has arrived as a big opportunity for us. We have to make full use of this opportunity and focus on Global Good, world welfare. Whether it is peace or unity, sensitivity towards the environment, or sustainable development, India has solutions to challenges related to these. The theme that we have given “One Earth, One Family, One Future” shows our commitment to Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam. We always say –
Om Sarvesham Swastirbhavatu.
Sarvesham Shanti Bhavatu.
Sarvesham Purnambhavatu.
Sarvesham Mangalambhavatu.
Om Shanti: Shanti: Shanti: ॥
That is, there should be welfare of all, peace to all, fulfillment to all and well being for all. In the coming days, many programs related to G-20 will be organized in different parts of the country. During this period, people from different parts of the world will get a chance to visit your states. I am sure that you will bring the diverse and distinctive colors of your culture to the world and you also have to remember that the people coming to the G-20, even if they come now as delegates, are tourists of the future. I urge all of you, especially my young friends on one more thing. Like Hariprasad Garu, you too must join the G-20 in one way or the other. The Indian logo of G-20 can be made, can be printed, in a very cool way, in a stylish way, on clothes. I would also urge schools, colleges and universities to create opportunities for discussions, debates and competitions related to G-20 in their respective places. If you go to the G20.in website, you will find many things there according to your interest.
My dear countrymen, on the 18th of November, the whole country witnessed new history being made in the space sector. On this day, India sent its first such rocket into space, which was designed and prepared by the private sector of India. The name of this rocket is – ‘Vikram-S’. As soon as this first rocket of the indigenous Space Start-up made a historic flight from Sriharikota, the heart of every Indian swelled with pride.
Friends, ‘Vikram-S’ Rocket is equipped with many features. It is also lighter than other rockets, and also cheaper. Its development cost is much less than the cost incurred by other countries involved in space missions. In space technology, World class standard at a low cost, has now become the hallmark of India. Another modern technology has been used in making this rocket. You will be surprised to know that some crucial parts of this rocket have been made through 3D Printing. Surely, the name ‘Prarambh’ given to the launch mission of ‘Vikram-S’, suits it perfectly. This marks the dawn of a new era for the private space sector in India. This is the beginning of a new era full of self-confidence for the country. You can imagine the children who once made paper airplanes and used to fly them with their hands are now getting a chance to make airplanes in India itself. You can imagine those children who once used to draw shapes in the sky, looking at the moon and stars, are now getting a chance to make rockets in India itself. After space was opened to the private sector, these dreams of the youth are also coming true. As if these youth making rockets are saying, Sky is not the limit.
Friends, India is sharing its success in the space sector with its neighbouring countries as well. Just yesterday, India launched a satellite, which has been jointly developed by India and Bhutan. This satellite will send pictures of very good resolution which will help Bhutan in the management of its natural resources. The launching of this satellite is a reflection of the strong Indo-Bhutan relations.
Friends, you must have noticed that in the last few episodes of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we discussed a lot on Space, Tech, Innovation. There are two special reasons for this: one is that our youth are doing wonderful work in this field. They are thinking Big and Achieving Big. Now they are not going to be satisfied with small achievements. Secondly, in this exciting journey of innovation and value creation, they are also encouraging their other young colleagues and start-ups.
Friends, when we are talking about innovations related to technology, how can we forget drones? India is also moving fast in the field of drones. A few days ago we saw how apples were transported through drones in Kinnaur, Himachal Pradesh. Kinnaur is a remote district of Himachal and there is heavy snowfall in this season. With this much snowfall, Kinnaur’s connectivity with the rest of the state becomes very difficult for weeks. In such a situation, the transportation of apples from there is equally difficult. Now with the help of Drone Technology, delicious Kinnauri apples of Himachal will start reaching people more quickly. This will reduce the expenditure of our farmer brothers and sisters – apples will reach the market on time, there will be less wastage of apples.
Friends, Today our countrymen are making things possible with their innovations, which could not even be imagined earlier. Who would not be happy to see this? In recent years, our country has undertaken a long journey of achievements. I have full faith that we Indians and especially our young generation are not going to stop now.
Dear countrymen, I am going to play a small clip for you…..
##(Song)##
All of you must have heard this song sometime or the other. After all, this is Bapu’sfavorite song, but if I tell you that the singers who have sung it are from Greece, you will definitely be surprised! And this will also fill you with pride. This song has been sung by the singer from Greece – ‘Konstantinos Kalaitzis’. He had sung it during the 150th birth anniversary celebrations of Gandhiji. But today I am discussing him for some other reason. He has a great passion for India and Indian music. He has so much affection for India, that in the last 42 (forty two) years he has come to India almost every year. He has studied about the origin of Indian music, different Indian musical systems, different types of ragas, talas and rasas as well as different gharanas. He has studied the contribution of many great personalities of Indian music; he has also closely understood the different aspects of classical dances of India. Now he has put together all these experiences related to India very beautifully in a book. There are about 760 pictures in his book named Indian Music. Most of these photographs have been taken by he himself. Such enthusiasm and fascination for Indian culture in other countries is really heartening.
Friends, a few weeks ago another news came which is going to fill us with pride. You will be pleased to know that in the last 8 years the export of musical instruments from India has increased three and a half times. Talking about Electrical Musical Instruments; their export has increased 60 times. This shows that the craze for Indian culture and music is increasing all over the world. The biggest buyers of Indian Musical Instruments are developed countries like USA, Germany, France, Japan and UK. It is a matter of fortune for all of us that our country has such a rich heritage of Music, Dance and Art.
Friends, we all know the great sage poet Bhartrihari for his ‘Niti Shatak’. In one of the verses he says that one’s attachment to art, music and literature is the real identity of humanity. In fact, our culture takes it above Humanity, to Divinity. In the Vedas, Samaveda has been called the source of our diverse music. Be it the Veena of Maa Saraswati, the flute of Bhagwan Krishna, or the Damru of Bholenath, our Gods and Goddesses are also attached with music. We Indians find music in everything. Be it the murmur of a river, the raindrops, the chirping of birds or the resonating sound of the wind, music is present everywhere in our civilization. This music relaxes not only the body, but also gives joy to the mind. Music also connects our society. If Bhangra and Lavani have a sense of fervor and joy, Rabindra Sangeet lifts our souls. Tribals across the country have different musical traditions. They inspire us to live in harmony with each other and with nature.
Friends, Our forms of music have not only enriched our culture, but have also left an indelible mark on the music of the world. The fame of Indian music has spread to every corner of the world. Let me play to you one more audio clip.
##(Song)##
You must be thinking that bhajan kirtan is being performed in some temple in the neighbourhood. But these notes have reached you from Guyana, a South American country thousands of miles away from India. In the 19th and 20th centuries, a large number of people from here went to Guyana. They also took many traditions of India with them from here. For example, as we celebrate Holi in India, in Guyana also the colors of Holi come alive with zest. Where there are colors of Holi, there is also the music of Phagwa that is Phagua. In Phagwa of Guyana there is a special tradition of singing wedding songs associated with Bhagwan Rama and Bhagwan Krishna. These songs are called Chautal. They are sung on the similar type of tune and at a high pitch as we do here. Not only this, Chautal Competitions are also held in Guyana. Similarly, many Indians, especially people from eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, had gone to Fiji too. They used to sing traditional bhajan-kirtans, mainly couplets from the Ramcharitmanas. They also formed many Mandalis associated with bhajan-kirtan in Fiji. Even today there are more than two thousand Bhajan-Kirtan Mandalis in Fiji by the name of Ramayana Mandali. Today they can be seen in every village and locality.
I have given only a few examples here. If you see in the whole world, then this list of lovers of Indian music is very long.
My dear countrymen, we all always take pride in the fact that our country is home to the oldest traditions in the world. Therefore, it is also our responsibility to preserve our traditions and traditional knowledge, to promote it and to take it forward as much as possible. One such commendable effort is being made by some friends of our northeastern state of Nagaland. I liked this effort very much, so I thought, I’d share it with the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Friends, the lifestyle of the Naga community in Nagaland, their art-culture and music attracts everyone. It is an important part of the glorious heritage of our country. The life of the people of Nagaland and their skills are also very important for a sustainable life style. In order to save these traditions and skills and pass them on to the next generation, the people there have formed an organization, that’s name is ‘Lidi-Cro-U’. ‘ The organization has undertaken the work of reviving beautiful facets of Naga culture which were on the verge of being lost. For example, Naga folk music is a very rich genre in itself. This organization has started the work of launching Naga Music Albums. So far, three such albums have been launched. These people also organize workshops related to folk music and folk dance. Youth are also given training for all these. Not only this, the youth are also trained in the traditional Nagaland style of apparel making, tailoring and weaving. Many types of products are made from bamboo in the Northeast. The youth of the new generation are also taught to make bamboo products. With this, these youth not only get connected with their culture, but also create new employment opportunities for them. People at Lidi-Cro-U try to make more and more people know about Naga folk-culture.
Friends, there will be such cultural styles and traditions in your region too. You too can make such efforts in your respective areas. If you are aware of any such unique effort being made somewhere, then you must share that information with me as well.
My dear countrymen, we it has been said here –
Vidyadhanam Sarva Dhanam Pradhanam
That is, if someone is donating knowledge, then he is doing the noblest work in the interest of the society. Even a small lamp lit in the field of education can illuminate the whole society. It gives me great pleasure to see that many such efforts are being made across the country today. Bansa is a village in Hardoi, 70-80 kilometres away from Lucknow, the capital of UP. I have come to know about Jatin Lalit Singh ji of this village, who is engaged in kindling the flame of education. Jatin ji had started a ‘Community Library and Resource Centre’ here two years ago.
, His centre has more than 3000 books related to Hindi and English literature, computer, law and preparing for many government exams. In this library, the choice of the children has also been taken full care of. Whether it is comic books or educational toys present here, children are very fond of them. Small children come here to learn new things while playing. Be it offline or online education, about 40 volunteers are busy guiding the students at this center. Everyday about 80 students of the village come to study in this library.
Friends, Sanjay Kashyap ji of Jharkhand is also giving new wings to the dreams of poor children. In his student life, Sanjay ji had to face the paucity of good books. In such a situation, he decided that, he would not let the future of the children of his region be dark, due to lack of books. Because of this mission, today he has become the ‘Library Man’ for children in many districts of Jharkhand. When Sanjay ji had started working, he had got the first library built at his native place. Wherever he was transferred during his job, he would get involved in the mission of opening a library for the education of poor and tribal children. While doing this, he has opened libraries for children in many districts of Jharkhand. His mission to open a library is taking the form of a social movement today. Be it Sanjay ji or Jatin ji, I especially appreciate them for their myriad such efforts.
My dear countrymen, the world of medical science has made a lot of progress with the help of research and innovation as well as state-of-the-art technology and equipment, but some diseases, even today, remain a big challenge for us. One such disease is – Muscular Dystrophy! It is mainly a genetic disease that can occur at any age, in which the muscles of the body begin to weaken. It becomes difficult for the patient to do even his small tasks of daily life. The treatment and care of such patients require great sense of service. We have such a centre at Solan in Himachal Pradesh, which has become a new ray of hope for the patients of Muscular Dystrophy. The name of this centre is ‘Manav Mandir’; it is being run by the Indian Association of Muscular Dystrophy. Manav Mandir is a wonderful example of human service true to its name. OPD and admission services for the patients started here three-four years ago. Manav Mandir also has the facility of beds for about 50 patients. Along with Physiotherapy, Electrotherapy, and Hydrotherapy, diseases are also treated here with the help of Yoga-Pranayama.
Friends, through all kinds of hi-tech facilities, this centre also tries to bring a positive change in the lives of the patients. A challenge associated with Muscular Dystrophy is also a lack of awareness about it. That’s why, this centre organizes awareness camps for patients not only in Himachal Pradesh but across the country. The most encouraging thing is that the management of this organization is mainly done by people suffering from this disease, like social worker, Urmila Baldi ji, President of Indian Association Of Muscular Dystrophy Sister Sanjana Goyal ji, and other members of this association. Shriman Vipul Goyal ji, who played an important role in the formation, is playing a very important role for this institution. Efforts are also on to develop Manav Mandir as a hospital and research centre. With this, patients will be able to get better treatment here. I heartily appreciate all the people trying in this direction, as well as wish the best for recovery of all the people suffering from Muscular Dystrophy.
My dear countrymen, the creative and social endeavours of the countrymen that we discussed in today’s ‘Mann Ki Baat’ are examples of the country’s energy and enthusiasm. Today every countryman is trying to do something different for the country in one field or the other, at every level. In today’s discussion itself, we saw that in an international event like G-20, one of our weaver companions understood his responsibility and came forward to fulfil it. Similarly, some are making efforts for the environment, others are working for water; many people are doing extraordinary work… from education, medicine and science technology to culture-traditions. This is because, today every citizen of ours is realising one’s duties. When such a sense of duty rises within the citizens of a nation, its golden future is automatically ensured, and, in the golden future of the country itself, also lies for all of us, a golden future.
I once again salute the countrymen for their efforts. We will meet again next month and will definitely talk about many more such encouraging topics. Do keep sending your suggestions and ideas. Many thanks to all of you!




96. DECEMBER 25, 2022
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today we are coming together for the ninety-sixth (96) episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. The next episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ will be the first episode of the year 2023. In the messages sent by you, you have also urged to speak about the departing 2022. Observation of the past always gives us inspiration for preparations for the present and the future. In 2022, the strength of the people of the country, their cooperation, their resolve, their expansion of success was of such magnitude that it would be difficult to include all of those in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. 2022 has indeed been very inspiring, wonderful in many ways. This year India completed 75 years of her independence and this very year Amritkal commenced. This year the country gained a new momentum, all the countrymen performed one better than the other. The various successes of 2022, today, have created a special place for India all over the world. 2022 i.e. India attaining the status of the world’s fifth largest economy; 2022, i.e. the record of India surpassing the incredible figure of 220 crore vaccines; 2022,i.e. India crossing the magical exports figure of 400 billion dollars; 2022, i.e. adopting the resolution of ‘Self-reliant India’ by the people, enliving it; 2022 meaning welcoming India’s first indigenous Aircraft Carrier INS Vikrant, 2022 meaning India’s glory in Space, Drone and Defence Sector, 2022 meaning India’s might in every field | Even in the field of sports, be it the Commonwealth Games, or the victory of our women’s hockey team, our youth have shown tremendous potential.
Friends, along with all this, the year 2022 will always be remembered for one more reason. This is the extension of the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’. The people of the country also organized many amazing events to celebrate unity and togetherness. Be it the Madhavpur Mela in Gujarat, where Rukmini’s marriage, and Lord Krishna’s relationship with the Northeast is celebrated, or the Kashi-Tamil Sangamam, many colors of unity were visible in these festivals. In 2022, the countrymen have scripted another chapter of immortal history. Who can forget the ‘Har GharTiranga’ campaign organised in the month of August! Those were the moments giving every countryman goose bumps. In this campaign of 75 years of independence, the whole country assumed the hues of the tricolor. More than 6 crore people even sent selfies with the tricolor. This Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav will continue in the same way next year as well – it will further strengthen the foundation of Amrit Kaal.
Friends, this year India has also got the responsibility of chairing the G-20 group. I had also discussed this in detail last time. In the year 2023, we have to take the enthusiasm of G-20 to new heights; make this event a mass movement.
My dear countrymen, today the festival of Christmas is also being celebrated with great fervour all over the world. It is a day to remember the life and teachings of Jesus Christ. I wish you all a Merry Christmas.
Friends, today is also the birthday of our respected Atal Bihari Vajpayee ji. He was a great statesman who gave exceptional leadership to the country. He has a special place in the heart of every Indian. I have received a letter from Aasthaji from Kolkata. In this letter, she has mentioned about her recent visit to Delhi. She writes that during this, she took time out to visit the PM Museum. She liked Atal ji’s gallery very much in this museum. The picture clicked there with Atal ji has become memorable for her. In Atal ji’s gallery, we can have a glimpse of his valuable contribution to the country. Be it infrastructure, education or foreign policy, he strove to take India to new heights in every field. I once again solemnly bow to Atal ji from the core of my heart.
Friends, tomorrow, the 26th of December is ‘Veer Bal Diwas’ and I will have the privilege of participating in a programme dedicated to the martyrdom of Sahibzada Zorawar Singh ji and Sahibzada Fateh Singh ji in Delhi on this occasion. The country will always remember the sacrifice of Sahibzade and Mata Gujri.
My dear countrymen, it is said here –
Satyam kim pramanam, pratyaksham kim pramanam.
That is, truth does not require proof, what is evident also does not require proof.
But when it comes to modern Medical Science, the most important thing is – Evidence. Lack of evidence based research in the context of our scriptures like Yoga and Ayurveda has always been a challenge which has been a part of Indian life for centuries- results are visible, but evidence is not. But, I am happy that in the era of Evidence-based medicine, Yoga and Ayurveda are now standing up to the touchstone of tests of the modern era. All of you must have heard about the Tata Memorial center in Mumbai. This institute has earned a name for itself in Research, Innovation and Cancer care. An intensive research done by this center has revealed that yoga is very effective for breast cancer patients. Tata Memorial Center has presented the results of its research in the very prestigious Breast cancer conference held in America. These results have attracted the attention of the world’s biggest experts. Because, Tata Memorial center has conveyed with evidence how patients have benefited from Yoga. According to the research of this center, regular practice of yoga has reduced the risk of recurrence and death of breast cancer patients by 15 percent. This is the first example of Indian traditional medicine being tested vis a vis the stringent standards of Western methods. Also, this is the first study, in which yoga has been found to improve the quality of life in women affected by breast cancer. Its long term benefits have also come to the fore. The Tata Memorial Center has presented the results of its study at the European Society of Medical Oncology conference in Paris.
Friends, In today’s era, the more evidence-based Indian medical systems are, the more their acceptance will increase in the whole world. With this thought, an effort is also being made in Delhi’s AIIMS. Here, the Center for Integrative Medicine and Research was established six years ago to validate our traditional medical practices. Latest Modern Techniques and Research Methods are used in this. The center has already published 20 papers in reputed international journals. A paper published in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology describes the benefits of yoga for patients suffering from syncope. Similarly, in a Paper of Neurology Journal, in Migraine, the benefits of yoga have been explained. Apart from these, studies are being done regarding the benefits of yoga in many other diseases as well. Like Heart Disease, Depression, Sleep Disorder and problems faced by women during pregnancy.
Friends, a few days ago I was in Goa for the World Ayurveda Congress. Delegates from more than 40 countries participated in it and more than 550 Scientific Papers were presented here. Around 215 companies from around the world including India displayed their products in the exhibition here. In this expo which went on for four days, more than one lakh people enjoyed their experience related to Ayurveda. Even in the Ayurveda Congress, I reiterated the point for evidence based research to the Ayurveda experts gathered from all over the world. The way we all are seeing the power of Yoga and Ayurveda in this time of the Corona global pandemic, evidence-based research related to these will prove to be very significant. I also urge you that if you have any information about such efforts related to Yoga, Ayurveda and our traditional treatment methods, then do share them on social media.
My dear countrymen, in the last few years we have overcome many major challenges related to the health sector. Full credit for this goes to the willpower of our Medical Experts, Scientists and countrymen. We have eradicated diseases like Smallpox, Polio and ‘Guinea Worm’ from India.
Today, I would like to tell the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ about another challenge, which is now about to end. This challenge, this disease is ‘Kala Azar’. The parasite of this disease is spread through the sting of the sand fly. When someone has ‘Kala Azar’, one has fever for months, there is anemia, the body becomes weak and the weight also decreases. This disease can happen to anyone from children to elders. But with everyone’s efforts, this disease named ‘Kala Azar’ is now getting eradicated rapidly. Till recently, the scourge of Kala-azar had spread in more than 50 districts across 4 states. But now this disease is confined to only 4 districts of Bihar and Jharkhand. I am sure, the strength and awareness of the people of Bihar-Jharkhand will help the government’s efforts to eliminate ‘Kala Azar’ from these four districts as well. I also urge the people of ‘Kala Azar’ affected areas to keep two things in mind. One is – control of sand fly, and second, diagnosis and complete treatment of this disease as soon as possible. The treatment of ‘Kala Azar’ is easy; the medicines used for this are also very effective. You just have to be alert. Do not be negligent if you have fever, and also keep spraying medicines that kill the sand fly. Just think, when our country will be free from ‘Kala Azar’, it will be a matter of joy for all of us. In this spirit of Sab ka Prayas, we are also working towards eradication of T.B. in India, by 2025. You must have seen, in the recent past, when the T.B. Mukt Bharat campaign started, thousands of people came forward to help the T.B. patients. These people, as Nikshay Mitras, are taking care of the patients, helping them financially. This power of public service and public participation achieves every difficult goal with certainty.
My dear countrymen, our tradition and culture have an unbreakable connection with Ma Ganga. Ganga water has been an integral part of our way of life and it is also said in our scriptures:-
Namami Gange Tav Paad Pankajam,
Sur Asurai: Vandit Divya Roopam |
Bhuktim cha muktim cha dadasi nityam,
Bhaav Anusaaren Sadaa Naraanaam ||
Meaning, O Mother Ganga! You bestow worldly happiness, bliss and salvation on your devotees according to their wishes. All worship your holy feet. I also offer my salutations at your holy feet. Amid that, it is a big responsibility of all of us to keep clean Mother Ganges that has been flowing for centuries. With this objective, eight years ago, we started the ‘Namami Gange Campaign’. It is a matter of pride for all of us that, today, this initiative of India is getting appreciation from all over the world. The United Nations has included the ‘Namami Gange’ mission in the world’s top ten initiatives to restore the ecosystem. It is even more heartening that ‘Namami Gange’ has received this honor among 160 such initiatives from all over the world.
Friends, the biggest source of energy behind the ‘Namami Gange’ campaign is the continuous participation of the people. In the ‘NamamiGange’ campaign, Ganga Praharis and Ganga Doots also have a big role to play. They are engaged in spreading awareness through planting trees, cleaning ghats, Ganga Aarti, street plays, painting and poems. A lot of improvement is also being seen in Biodiversity due to this campaign. There has been a significant increase in the number of different species of Hilsa fish, Gangetic dolphin and turtles. With Ganga’s ecosystem being clean, other livelihood opportunities are also increasing. Here I would like to discuss the ‘Jalaj Ajeevika Model’, which has been prepared keeping Biodiversity in mind. This Tourism-based Boat Safaris has been launched at 26 Locations.
Obviously, the spread of the ‘Namami Gange’ mission, its scope, has increased much more than the cleaning of the river. Whereas this evidence is direct proof of our willpower and tireless efforts, on the other hand, it is also going to show a new path to the world in the direction of environmental protection.
My dear countrymen, when the power of our resolve is strong, even the biggest challenge becomes easy. The example of this has been set by Sange Sherpa ji of Thegu village of Sikkim. For the last 14 years, he is engaged in the work of environmental protection at an altitude of more than 12,000 feet. Sange ji has taken up the task of keeping clean the Tsomgo (Somgo) lake that is of cultural and mythological importance. With his untiring efforts, he has changed the look and feel of this glacier lake. When Sange Sherpa ji started this campaign of cleanliness in the year 2008, he had to face many difficulties. But within no time, along with the youth and villagers, the panchayat also started offering full support in this noble work. Today, if you go to see the Tsomgolake, you will find huge garbage bins all around there. Now the garbage collected here is sent for recycling. Garbage bags made of cloth are also given to the tourists coming here so that the garbage is not strewn around. Now about 5 lakh tourists reach here every year to see this very clean lake. Sange Sherpa has also been honored by many organizations for this unique effort to conserve Tsomgo (Somgo) lake. Due to such efforts, today Sikkim is counted among the cleanest states of India. Along with Sange Sherpa ji and his colleagues, I also heartily appreciate the people engaged in the noble effort of environmental protection across the country.
Friends, I am happy that the ‘Swachh Bharat Mission’ has become firmly rooted in the mind of every Indian today. Since the inception of this mass movement in the year 2014, to take it to new heights, many unique efforts have been made by the people.
These efforts are being made not only within the society but also on part of the government. The result of these continuous efforts is that – due to the removal of garbage, removal of unnecessary items, a lot of space opens up in the offices, new space is available. Earlier, due to lack of space, offices had to be maintained on rent at far off places. These days, due to this cleanliness, so much space is available, that, now, all the offices are converging at one place. In the past, even the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting also made a lot of effort in its offices in Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Kolkata, Shillong in many cities and because of that, today they have two, three floors, available completely in usage anew. Due to this cleanliness in itself, we are getting the best experience of optimum utilizations of our resources. In the society as well as in the villages, cities and even in the offices; even for the country, this campaign is proving useful in every way.
My dear countrymen, a new awareness is dawning in our country about our art and culture, a new consciousness is awakening. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we often discuss such examples. Just as art, literature and culture are the collective capital of the society, in the same way, it is the responsibility of the whole society to take them forward. One such successful effort is being made in Lakshadweep. There is a club on Kalpeni Island – Kummel Brothers Challengers Club. This club inspires the youth to preserve the local culture and traditional arts. Here the youth are trained in the local art Kolkali, Parichakli, Kilipaat and traditional songs. That is, the old heritage is being protected in the hands of the new generation, is moving forward and friends, I am happy that such efforts are being made not only in the country but also abroad. Recently news came in from Dubai that the Kalari club there has registered its name in the Guinness Book of World Records. Anyone could think that if Dubai’s club set a record, what is its relation with India? Actually, this record is related to Kalaripayattu, the ancient martial art of India. This record is for the performance of Kalari by the maximum number of people simultaneously. Kalari club Dubai, together with Dubai Police, planned this and displayed it on the National Day of UAE. In this event, people ranging from 4 years old children to 60 years olds showed their best ability of Kalari. This is a wonderful example of how different generations are carrying forward an ancient tradition, with full inner enthusiasm.
Friends, I would also like to inform the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ about ‘Quemashree’ ji, who lives in Gadak district of Karnataka. In the South, ‘Quemshree’ has been continuously engaged for the last 25 years in the mission of reviving the art-culture of Karnataka. You can imagine how great his Tpasya is! Earlier he was associated with the profession of Hotel Management. But, his attachment to his culture and tradition was so deep that he made it his mission. He created a platform by the name of ‘Kala Chetna’. This platform, today, organizes many programs of artists from Karnataka and from India and abroad. In this, many innovative endeavours are also undertaken to promote local art and culture.
Friends, this enthusiasm of the countrymen towards their art and culture is a manifestation of the feeling of ‘pride in our heritage’. In our country, there are so many such colors scattered in every corner. We should also work continuously to adorn and preserve them.
My dear countrymen, many beautiful and useful things are made from bamboo in many areas of the country. There are skilled bamboo artisans, skilled artists, especially in tribal areas. Ever since the country changed the British-era laws related to bamboo, a huge market has developed for it. Even in areas like Palghar in Maharashtra, tribal people make many beautiful products from bamboo. Things like boxes, chairs, teapots, baskets, and trays made of bamboo are becoming very popular. Not only this, these people also make beautiful clothes and decorations from bamboo grass. This is also providing employment to tribal women and their talent is also getting recognition.
Friends, a couple from Karnataka is sending many unique products made from betelnut fiber to the international market. This is a couple from Shivamogga in Karnataka – Shriman Suresh and his wife Shrimati Maithili. These people are making many decorative things ranging from trays, plates and handbags from betel nut fiber. Chappals made of this fiber are also being liked a lot today. Today their products are being sold in London and other markets of Europe. This is the very quality of our natural resources and traditional skills, which is being liked by everyone. In this traditional knowledge of India, the world is looking at ways of a sustainable future. We ourselves also need to be more and more aware in this direction. We ourselves should use such indigenous and local products and gift them to others as well. This will also strengthen our identity, strengthen the local economy, and, in large numbers, brighten the future of the people.
My dear countrymen, now we are slowly moving towards the unprecedented milestone of the 100th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I have received letters from many countrymen, in which they have expressed great inquisitiveness about the 100th episode. I would like it if you send me your suggestions for what we should talk about in the 100th episode and how to make it special. Next time we will meet in the year 2023. I wish you all the best for the year 2023.
May this year also be special for the country, may the country keep touching new heights, and together we have to take a resolution as well as make it come true. At this time many people are also in the mood for holidays. Enjoy these festivals a lot, but be a little cautious too. You are also seeing that, Corona is increasing in many countries of the world, so we have to take more care of precautions like mask and hand washing. If we are careful, then we will also be safe and there will be no hindrance in our enjoyment. With this, once again many best wishes to all of you. Thank you very much, Namaskar.


97. JANUARY 29, 2023
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. This is the first ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of 2023 and along with it, it is also the ninety-seventh episode of the programme. It gives me great pleasure to interact with all of you once again. Every year, the month of January is quite eventful. This month, around the 14th of January, the glitter of festivals abound across the country from north to south and from east to west. After this, the country also celebrates her Republic Day. This time also many aspects of the Republic Day celebrations are being praised a lot. Pulkit from Jaisalmer writes to me that it was great to see the workers who built the Kartavya path during the 26thJanuary parade. Jaya from Kanpur writes that she enjoyed seeing different aspects of Indian culture in the tableaux included in the parade. Women Camel Riders and the women contingent of CRPF, who took part in this parade for the first time, are also being highly appreciated.
Friends, Vatsal ji from Dehradun has written to me that I always wait for the 25th of January because the Padma Awards are announced that day; and in a way, the evening of the 25thitself raises my enthusiasm for the 26thJanuary. Many people have also shared their feelings about People’s Padma to those who have achieved through their dedication and service at the grassroots level. This time there has been a good representation of the tribal community and people associated with tribal life among the Padma awardees. Tribal life is different from the hustle and bustle of the cities; its challenges are also different. Despite this, tribal societies are always ready to preserve their traditions. Efforts are also made to preserve and research aspects related to tribal communities. Similarly, many great personalities who have worked on tribal languages like Toto, Ho, Kui, Kuvi and Manda have received Padma Awards. It is a matter of pride for all of us. Dhani Ram Toto, Janum Singh Soy and B. Ramakrishna Reddy ji…the whole country has become familiar with them now. People working with tribals like Siddhi, Jarawa and Onge have also been honoured this time. Such as…Hirabai Lobi, Ratan Chandra Kar and Ishwar Chandra Verma Ji. Tribal communities have been an integral part of our land, our heritage. Their contribution in the development of the country and society is very important. Honouring the personalities who worked for them, will also inspire the new generation. This year the echoes of the Padma Awards are being heard even in those areas which used to be Naxal affected. Due to their efforts, those who show the right path to the misguided youth in Naxalite affected areas have been honoured with Padma awards. For this, Ajay Kumar Mandavi, who does wood carving in Kanker, and Parshuram Komaji Khune, associated with the famous Jharipatti Rangbhoomi of Gadchiroli, have also received this honour. Similarly, Ramkuiwangbe Niume, Bikram Bahadur Jamatia and Karma Wangchu, who are involved in the preservation of their culture in the North-East, have also been honoured.
Friends, there are many people who have enriched the world of music among those who have been honoured with the Padma Awards this time. Who does not like music? Everyone’s choice of music may be different, but music is a part of everyone’s life. This time among the Padma awardees are those people who have expertise in spreading the melody of our traditional musical instruments like Santoor, Bamhum, Dwitara. Ghulam Mohammad Zaz, Moa Su-Pong, Ri-Singhbor Kurka-Long, Muni-Venkatappa and Mangal Kanti Rai are just a few of the names that are being discussed all around.
Friends, many Padma awardees are those friends among us, who always kept the country paramount, dedicating their lives to the principle of “Nation first”. They remained engaged in their work with devotion and never expected any reward for it. The satisfaction on the face of those for whom they are working is the biggest award for them. The pride of our countrymen has risen by honouring such dedicated people. I may not be able to take the names of all the Padma awardees here, but I definitely request you to know in detail about the inspirational life of these Padma awardees and tell others as well.
Friends, today when we are discussing our Republic Day during the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav, I will also mention an interesting book here. A very interesting subject has been discussed in this book which I received a few weeks ago. The name of this book is India – The Mother of Democracy and it has many excellent essays. India is the largest democracy in the world and we Indians are also proud of the fact that our country is also the Mother of Democracy. Democracy is in our veins, it is in our culture – it has been an integral part of our work for centuries. By nature, we are a Democratic Society. Dr. Ambedkar had compared the Buddhist monks union to the Indian Parliament. He described it as an institution where there were many rules for Motions, Resolutions, Quorum, Voting and counting of votes. Babasaheb believed that Lord Buddha must have got inspiration from the political systems of that time.
There is a small but famous village in Tamil Nadu – Utirmerur. Here an inscription of 1100-1200 years ago surprises the whole world. This rock-edict is like a mini-constitution. It has been explained in detail how the Gram Sabha should be conducted and what the procedure for selection of its members shall be. Another example of Democratic Values in the history of our country is the Anubhav Mandapam of Lord Basaveshwara of the 12thcentury. Here, free debate and discussion were encouraged. You will be surprised to know that it is even before the Magna Carta. The republican traditions of the Kakatiya dynasty kings of Warangal were also very famous. The Bhakti movement furthered the culture of democracy in western India. An article has also been included in the book on the democratic spirit of the Sikh Panth which throws light on the decisions taken by the consensus of Guru Nanak Dev Ji. The book also has good information on community driven and consensus driven decision making – in Oraon and Munda tribes of central India. After reading this book, you will feel how the spirit of democracy has been flowing in every part of the country for centuries. As the Mother of Democracy, we should constantly think deeply about this topic, discuss it and also inform the world. This will further strengthen the spirit of democracy in the country.
My dear countrymen, if I ask you, what is common between Yoga Day and our different types of coarse grains – Millets, then you might think…what is this comparison? If I say that both have a lot in common, you will be surprised. In fact, the United Nations has taken the decision of both International Yoga Day and International Year of Millets after India’s proposal. Secondly, yoga is also related to health and millets also play an important role in health. The third thing is more important – a revolution is on the way because of public participation in both campaigns. Just as people have made yoga and fitness a part of their lives by taking active participation on a large scale; similarly people are adopting millets on a large scale. People are now making millets a part of their diet. A huge impact of this change is also visible. On the one hand, the small farmers who traditionally used to produce millets are very excited. They are very happy that the world has now started understanding the importance of millets. On the other hand, FPOs and entrepreneurs have started efforts to market millets and make them available to people.
A resident of Nandyal district of Andhra Pradesh, K.V. Rama Subba Reddy Ji left a well paying job for the sake of millets. The taste of millets made by his mother’s hands was such that he started a millet processing unit in his village. Subba Reddy ji also explains the benefits of millets to the people and also makes it easily available. Sharmila Oswal, a resident of Kenad village near Alibaug in Maharashtra, has been contributing in a unique way in the production of millets for the last 20 years. She is imparting training in smart agriculture to farmers. Her efforts have not only increased the yield of millets, but also increased the income of the farmers.
If you get a chance to visit Raigarh in Chhattisgarh, you must visit the Millets Cafe here. Items like Chilla, Dosa, Momos, Pizza and Manchurian are becoming very popular in this Millets Cafe which started a few months back.
May I ask you one more thing? You must have heard the word entrepreneur, but have you heard Milletpreneurs? Milletpreneurs of Odisha are in the limelight these days. A Self Help Group of about 1500 women of the tribal district Sundergarh is associated with the Odisha Millets Mission. Here women are making everything from millets… to cookies, rasgulla, gulab jamun, and even cakes. Due to their great demand in the market, the income of women is also increasing.
The Aland Bhootai (Aland Bhutai) Millets Farmers Producer Company started work last year under the supervision of the Indian Institute of Millets Research in Kalaburgi, Karnataka. People are liking the khakra, biscuits and laddoos here. In Karnataka’s Bidar district, women associated with the Hulsoor Millet Producer Company are cultivating millets as well as preparing their flour. Through this, their earnings have also increased a lot. Farmers from 12 states have joined the FPO of Chhattisgarh’s Sandeep Sharma, who is associated with natural farming. This FPO of Bilaspur is making 8 types of millets flour and their dishes.
Friends, Today G-20 summit events are going on in every corner of India and I am happy that in every corner of the country, wherever the G-20 summit is being held, nutritious and tasty dishes made from millets are included in it. Dishes like Bajra-khichdi, poha, kheer and roti, as well as Ragi-based payasam, puri and dosa are also served here. Health drinks, cereals and noodles made from millets were showcased in the Millets Exhibitions at all G20 venues. Indian Missions around the world are also making a lot of efforts to increase their popularity. You can imagine that this effort of the country and the increasing demand of Millets in the world is going to give strength to our small farmers. It gives joy to me to see that the variety of new things that have started being made from Millets today is being liked equally by the young generation. I also congratulate the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ for such a wonderful start to the International Year of Millets and for relentlessly taking it forward.
My dear countrymen, what comes to your mind when someone talks about the Tourist Hub Goa?
Naturally, as soon as the name of Goa is referred to; first of all, the beautiful Coastline, Beaches and favourite food items come to mind. But something happened in Goa this month, which is in the headlines. Today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I want to share this with all of you. This event happened in Goa – Purple Fest. This fest was organized in Panaji from 6 to 8 January. This was a unique effort in itself for the welfare of the divyangs. How big an occasion Purple Fest was, you can all guess from the fact that more than 50 thousand brothers and sisters of ours participated in it. The people who came here were thrilled about the fact that they could now enjoy the ‘Miramar Beach’ to the fullest. In fact, ‘Miramar Beach’ has become one of the accessible beaches of Goa for our Divyang brothers and sisters. Along with a Cricket Tournament, Table Tennis Tournament, Marathon Competition, a Deaf-Blind Convention was also organized here. Apart from the Unique Bird Watching Program, a film was also shown here. Special arrangements were made for this, so that all our Divyang brothers and sisters and children could enjoy it to the fullest.
One special thing about Purple Fest was the participation of the private sector of the country in it. Products which are Divyang Friendly were showcased on their behalf. Many efforts were seen in this fest to raise awareness about the welfare of the divyangs. For making Purple Fest a success, I congratulate all the people who participated in it. Along with this, I also congratulate those volunteers, who came together to work day and night to organize this. I have full faith that such campaigns will prove to be very effective in realizing our Vision of Accessible India.
My dear countrymen, now in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I will talk on a topic, in which you will feel joy and pride and your mind will say – Wow what a joy! One of the oldest Science Institutions in the country, the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, i.e. IISc, is presenting a wonderful example. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I have discussed earlier, how the two great personalities of India, Jamsetji Tata and Swami Vivekananda, have been the inspiration behind the establishment of this institution. And a matter of joy and pride for us is that in the year 2022, there have been a total of 145 patents in the name of this institute. This means – two patents every five days. This record is amazing in itself. I would also like to congratulate the team of IISc for this success. Friends, Today India’s ranking is 7th in Patent Filing and 5th in Trademarks. Talking about patents only, there has been an increase of about 50 percent in the last five years. In the Global Innovation Index too, India’s ranking has improved tremendously and now it has reached 40th position, while in 2015, India was behind even the 80th position in the Global Innovation Index. I want to tell you one more interesting thing. For the first time in the last 11 years in India, the number of Domestic Patent Filing was seen more than Foreign Filing. It also shows the growing scientific prowess of India.
Friends, we all know that knowledge is paramount in the global economy of the 21st century. I believe that the dream of India’s Techade will definitely be fulfilled on the strength of our Innovators and their Patents. With this, we all will be able to take full advantage of world class technology and products prepared in our own country.
My dear countrymen, I saw a post on NaMoApp by engineer Vijay ji from Telangana. In this, Vijayji has written about E-Waste. Vijay ji requests that I discuss this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Earlier too in this programme we have talked about ‘Waste to Wealth’ i.e. ‘Kachre se Kanchan’, but come, today, let’s discuss E-Waste related to this.
Friends, today devices like Mobile Phone, Laptop, Tablet have become common in every household. Their number will be in Billions across the country. Today’s latest devices are also future’s E-Waste. Whenever someone buys a new device or replaces one’s old device, it becomes necessary to keep in mind whether it is discarded properly or not. If E-Waste is not disposed of properly, it can also harm our environment. But, if done carefully, it can become a great force in the Circular Economy of Recycle and Reuse. It was mentioned in a United Nations report that 50 million tonnes of E-Waste is being thrown every year. Can you guess how much? Even if the weight of all the commercial planes that have been built in the history of mankind is combined, it will not equal the amount of E-Waste being released. It is like every second 800 laptops are being thrown away. You will be amazed to know that about 17 types of Precious Metals can be extracted from this E-Waste through different processes. This includes Gold, Silver, Copper and Nickel, so utilizing E-Waste is no less than making ‘Kachre Ko Kanchan’. Today there is no dearth of start-ups that are doing innovative work in this direction. At present, around 500 E-Waste Recyclers are associated with this sector and many new entrepreneurs are also being associated with it. This sector has also given direct employment to thousands of people. E-Parisaraa of Bengaluru is engaged in one such effort. It has developed an indigenous technology for extracting precious metals from Printed Circuit Boards.
Similarly, Ecoreco working in Mumbai has developed a system to collect E-Waste through a Mobile App. Attero Recycling of Roorkee, Uttarakhand has obtained many patents in this field worldwide. It has also earned a lot of awards by preparing its own E-Waste Recycling Technology. Tonnes of E-Waste are being collected in Bhopal through a Mobile App and the Website ‘Kabadiwala’. There are many such examples. All these are helping to make India a Global Recycling Hub; but, there is also an essential condition for the success of such Initiatives – that is, people have to be made aware about safe useful methods of disposal of E-Waste. Those working in the field of E-Waste say that at present, only 15-17 percent E-Waste is being recycled every year.
My dear countrymen, today there is a lot of talk about climate change and conservation of Biodiversity all over the world. We have been continuously talking about India’s concrete efforts in this direction. You will also be very happy to know the work that India has done for its wetlands. Some listeners might be wondering what wetlands are ? ‘Wetland sites’ means those places where water remains accumulated throughout the year on marshy soil-like land. A few days later, on February 2, it is World Wetlands Day. Wetlands are very important for the existence of our earth, because many birds and animals depend on them. Along with enriching Biodiversity, they also ensure Flood control and Ground Water Recharge. Many of you must be knowing that Ramsar Sites are such wetlands which are of International Importance. Wetlands may be there in any country; but they have to fulfill many criteria; only then are they declared as Ramsar Sites. Ramsar Sites should have 20,000 or more water birds. It is important to have a large number of local fish species. On 75 years of independence during the Amrit Mahotsav, I would like to share with you some good information related to Ramsar Sites. Now the total number of Ramsar Sites in our country has increased to 75, whereas, before 2014 there were only 26 Ramsar Sites in the country. For this, the local community deserves congratulations, who have preserved this Biodiversity. It is also a tribute to our age-old culture and tradition of living in harmony with nature. These wetlands of India are also an example of our natural potential. Chilika Lake of Odisha is known to shelter more than 40 waterbird species. Kaibul-Lamjaa, Loktak is considered to be the only natural habitat of the Swamp Deer.
Vedanthangal of Tamil Nadu was declared a Ramsar Site in 2022. The entire credit for preserving the bird population here goes to the farmers in the neighbourhood. The Panjath Nag community in Kashmir spends a day specially cleaning the village spring during the Annual Fruit Blossom festival. Most of the Words Ramsar Sites also have a Unique cultural heritage. Manipur’s cultures have a deep connection with Loktak and the sacred lake Renuka. Similarly, Sambhar is also related to Shakambhari Devi, an incarnation of Maa Durga. This expansion of Wetlands in India is possible because of the people who live around Ramsar Sites. I greatly appreciate all such people, on behalf of the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, and wish them all the best.
My dear countrymen, this time in our country, especially in North India, there was severe winter. In this winter, people also enjoyed snowfall on the mountains. Some pictures came in from Jammu and Kashmir which captivated hearts in the entire country. People from all over the world are liking these pictures on social media. Due to snowfall, our Kashmir valley has become very beautiful like every year this time too! People also particularly like the video of the train going from Banihal to Budgam. Beautiful snowfall, white sheet like snow all around. People are saying that this scene looks like a fairy tale! Many people are saying that these are not pictures of any foreign country, but of Kashmir in our own country.
A social media user has written – ‘What would be more beautiful than this heaven?’ This is absolutely correct – that is why Kashmir is called heaven on earth. Seeing these pictures, you too must be thinking of going on a trip to Kashmir. I would like you to go there yourself and take your friends along. Snow-capped mountains in Kashmir, along with natural beauty; there are many more things to see and know. For example, Winter Games were organized in Syedabad, Kashmir. The theme of these Games was – Snow Cricket! You might be thinking that Snow Cricket would be a very exciting game –and you are absolutely right.
Kashmiri youth make cricket even more amazing in the snow. Through this, there is also a search for young players in Kashmir, who will later play as Team India. In a way, this is also an extension of the Khelo India Movement. In Kashmir, there is a lot of enthusiasm among the youth regarding sports. In the coming times, many of these youth will win medals for the country, and will hoist the tricolor. I would suggest that the next time you plan a trip to Kashmir, take out time to visit such events. These experiences will make your trip even more memorable.
My dear countrymen, our efforts to strengthen our Republic should go on relentlessly. The Republic becomes strong ‘by public participation’, ‘by everyone’s effort’, ‘by performing one’s duties towards the country’, and I am satisfied that, our ‘Mann Ki Baat’, is the emphatic voice of such dutiful fighters. We will meet again next time with interesting and inspiring stories of such dedicated people.
Thank you very much.




98. FEBRUARY 26, 2023
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. I am feeling very happy to join you all in this 98th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. In this journey towards a century, all of you have made ‘Mann Ki Baat’ a wonderful platform as an expression of public participation. Every month, in millions of messages, the ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of lots of people reaches out to me. You know the power of your mind… Similarly, how the might of the country increases with the strength of the society…this we have seen and understood in different episodes of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. And I have experienced it – have also accepted it. I remember the day when we talked about encouraging traditional sports of India in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Immediately at that time, a wave arose in the country to join Indian Sports, to enjoy them, to learn them. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, when we referred to Indian toys, the people of the country promoted this too, readily. Nowadays, Indian toys have become such a craze that their demand has increased even in foreign countries. When we spoke of Indian genres of story-telling in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, their fame also reached far and wide. People started getting attracted towards the Indian story-telling genre, more and more.
Friends, you might remember that on Sardar Patel’s birth anniversary i.e. ‘Unity Day’, we talked of three competitions in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. These competitions, ‘Geet’ – Patriotic Songs, ‘Lullabies’ and ‘Rangoli’ were associated with it. I am glad to inform you, that more than 5 lakh people from more than 700 districts across the country have participated in this enthusiastically. Children, adults and the elderly enthusiastically participated and entries have been sent in more than 20 languages. Many many congratulations to all the participants in these competitions from my side. Each one of you, in your own right is a champion, an art seeker. You all have shown how much love you have for the diversity and culture of your country.
Friends, today on this occasion it is very natural for me to remember Lata Mangeshkar ji, Lata Didi. Because on the day that this competition had started, Lata Didi had urged the countrymen by tweeting that they must join this endeavour.
Friends, in the lullaby writing competition, the first prize has been won by B.M. Manjunath ji of Chamrajnagar district in Karnataka. He received this award for his lullaby ‘Malagu Kanda’ written in Kannada. He got the inspiration to write this from the lullabies sung by his mother and grandmother. Listen to it, you will enjoy it too.
[Kannada Sound Clip (35 seconds)]
“Sleep, sleep, baby,
Sleep, my smart darling,
The day is gone and it is dark,
The goddess of sleep will arrive,
From the garden of the stars,
Will carve out dreams for you!
Go to sleep, Go to sleep,
Jojo…jo..jo..
Jojo…jo..jo..”
Dinesh Gowala, a resident of Kamrup district in Assam, has won the second prize in this competition. The lullaby he has written bears a reflection of the popular craft of the artisans who make clay and pot vessels locally.
[Assamese Sound Clip (35 seconds)]
Brother Potter has brought a bag,
Say, What’s in the bag?
Opened it and saw the potter’s bag,
There was a lovely bowl in the bag!
Our doll asked the potter,
What is this little bowl!
Just like songs and lullabies, the Rangoli Competition also turned out to be quite popular. The participants made many a beautiful Rangoli, one better than the other. In this, the winning entry proved to be that of Kamal Kumar from Punjab. He made very beautiful Rangoli of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose and Amar Shaheed Veer Bhagat Singh. Sachin Narendra Avsari ji of Sangli Maharashtra, in his Rangoli, has depicted Jallianwala Bagh, the massacre and the bravery of Shaheed Udham Singh. Gurudutt Vantekar, a resident of Goa, made a Rangoli on Gandhiji, while Malathiselvam ji of Puducherry also focused on many great freedom fighters. The winner of the patriotic song competition, T. Vijay Durga ji is from Andhra Pradesh. She had sent her entry in Telugu. She has been greatly inspired by Narasimha Reddy Garu ji, the famous freedom fighter of her region. Do listen to this part of Vijay Durga ji’s entry
[Telugu Sound Clip (27 seconds)]
The Sun of Renadu State,
O brave Narasimha!
You are the seedling of the Indian Freedom Struggle and the restraint!
Look at the unjust and the autocratic repression tendencies of the British.
Your blood ignited and fire sprang up!
The Sun of Renadu State,
O brave Narasimha!
After Telugu, I will now make you listen to a clip in Maithili. It has been sent by Deepak Vats ji. He has also won a prize in this competition.
[Maithili Sound Clip (30 seconds)]
India is the pride of the world brother,
Our country is great
Surrounded by seas on three sides,
Kailash is strong in the north,
Ganga, Yamuna, Krishna, Kaveri,
Koshi, Kamla Balan,
Our country is great brother
Our life sustenance is our Tricolour!
Friends, I hope you have liked them. The list of such entries that entered the competition is very long. While visiting the website of the Ministry of Culture, do watch and listen to them with your family – you will be greatly inspired.
My dear countrymen, whether it is about Banaras or the Shehnai or Ustad Bismillah Khan ji, it is natural that my attention will be drawn in that direction. A few days ago, ‘Ustad Bismillah Khan Yuva Puraskar’ were conferred. These awards were given away to emerging, talented artists in the field of music and performing arts. These, along with the rising popularity of the art and music world are also contributing in their enrichment. These also include artists who have breathed new life into those instruments, whose popularity was decreasing with time. Listen carefully now to this tune.
[Sound Clip (21 seconds) Instrument- ‘Sursingar’, Artist -Joydeep Mukherjee]
Do you know what instrument this is? It could be possible that you may not be aware of it! The name of this musical instrumental mantra is ‘Sursingar’ and this tune has been composed by Joydeep Mukherjee. Joydeep ji is among the youth honored with the Ustad Bismillah Khan Award. It had become rare to hear tunes of this instrument since the late 50’s and 60’s. But, Joydeep is persevering towards making the Sursingar popular once again. Similarly, the efforts of sister Uppalpu Nagmani ji are also very inspiring, who has been awarded in the category of Carnatic Instrumental on the Mandolin. On the other hand, Sangram Singh Suhas Bhandare ji has been awarded for Warkari Kirtan. This list doesn’t just pertain to music artistes – V Durga Devi ji has won this award for ‘Karakattam’, an ancient dance form. Another winner of the award, Raj Kumar Nayak ji, organized the Perini Odissi, which lasted for 101 days in 31 districts of Telangana. Today, people have started knowing him by the name of Perini Rajkumar. Perini Natyam, a dance dedicated to Lord Shiva, was quite popular during the Kakatiya Dynasty. The roots of this dynasty are still associated with Telangana. There is another award winner – Saikhom Surchandra Singh. He is known for his mastery in making Meitei Pung Instrument. This instrument has connections with Manipur. Pooran Singh is a Divyang Artist, who is popularizing various Music Forms such as – Rajula-Malushahi, Nyuli, Hudka Bol, Jagar. He has also prepared many audio recordings related to them. The talented folk music artist of Uttarakhand, Puran Singh ji has also won many awards. Due to the limitation of time, I may not be able to talk about all the awardees here, but I am sure that you will definitely read about them. I hope that all these artists will continue to inspire everyone at the grassroots towards making performing arts more popular.
My dear countrymen, in our fast moving country, the power of Digital India is visible in every corner. Different apps play a big role in taking the power of Digital India to every home. There is one such App, E-Sanjeevani. Through this App Tele-consultation, that is, while sitting far away, through video conference, you can consult a doctor about your illness. Till now, the number of tele-consultants using this app has crossed the figure of 10 crores. You can imagine!… 10 crore Consultations through video conference….An amazing bond between patient and doctor – this is a big achievement. For this achievement, I congratulate all the doctors and patients who have availed of this facility. This is a living example of how the people of India have made technology a part of their lives. We have seen that in the time of Corona, E-Sanjeevani App has proved to be a great boon for the people. It also occurred to me…. Why not talk about this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ with a doctor and a patient, communicate and convey the matter to you all!. Let us try to know how effective Tele-consultation has been for the people. With us is Dr. Madan Mani ji from Sikkim. Dr. Madan Mani hails from Sikkim itself, but did his MBBS from Dhanbad and then did his MD from Banaras Hindu University. He has provided tele-consultation to hundreds of people in rural areas.
Prime Minister: Namaskar… Namaskar Madan Mani ji.
Dr. Madan Mani: Ji Namaskar Sir.
Prime Minister: This is Narendra Modi speaking!
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes… Yes Sir.
Prime Minister: You have studied in Banaras.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, I have studied in Banaras, Sir
Prime Minister: Your medical education took place there.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes… Yes.
Prime Minister: So, did you ever go to see the Banaras of that time when you were there earlier and the changed Banaras of today?
Dr. Madan Mani: Ji Prime Minister ji, I have not been able to visit since I have come back to Sikkim, but I have heard that a lot has changed.
Prime Minister: So how many years have passed since you left Banaras?
Dr. Madan Mani: I have left Banaras since 2006 sir.
Prime Minister: O… then you must go.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes… Yes.
Prime Minister: Well, I called because you are providing great services of teleconsultation to the people of Sikkim, living in remote mountains.
Dr. Madan Mani: Ji
Prime Minister: I would like to share your experience with the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes.
Prime Minister: Tell me, how was the experience?
Dr. Madan Mani: It was a great experience Prime Minister ji…The fact is the nearest PHC in Sikkim… To go there also people have to board a vehicle and carry at least one or two hundred rupees. And whether a doctor would be available… this is also a problem. So through Tele Consultation, we connect directly with people….with people from faraway places. The CHOs of Health & Wellness Centres get them connected with us. And they tell us the reports of their old ailments, their present condition…. everything.
Prime Minister: That means you transfer the documents!
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes…Yes… We also transfer documents and if they are unable to transfer, they read out and tell us.
Prime Minister: The doctor of the Wellness Center there conveys!
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, the CHO who lives in the Wellness Center, Community Health Officer.
Prime Minister: And the one who is a patient tells you about his difficulties directly.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, the patient also tells us about his difficulties. Then after seeing the old records, if we want to know any new things. For example, one has to auscultate someone’s chest… if his feet are swollen or not? If the CHO has not seen it, then we tell him to go and see whether there is swelling or not, look at the eyes, whether he has anaemia or not, if he has cough, then auscultate the chest and find out whether there are sounds there or not.
Prime Minister: Do you talk through Voice Call or do you also use Video Call?
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, we use Video Call.
Prime Minister: So you see the patient as well.
Dr. Madan Mani: Can see the patient also, sir.
Prime Minister: What feeling does the patient get?
Dr. Madan Mani: The patient likes it because he can see the doctor closely. He is confused whether his medicine has to be increased or decreased, because most of the patients in Sikkim are of diabetes and hypertension and how far he will have to go to find a doctor to change the medicine for diabetes and hypertension. But through Tele Consultation, it is available there and medicine is also available through Free Drugs initiative in the Health & Wellness Center. So, the patient avails of the medicine from there itself.
Prime Minister: Well Madan Mani ji, you know that the patient has a tendency that until the doctor comes; until the doctor sees him; he is not satisfied and the doctor also feels that he will have to see the patient. Now since all the consultations there are done through Telecom, what does the doctor feel; what does the patient feel?
Dr. Madan Mani: Ji… we also feel that if the patient feels that he should see the doctor, then whatever things we want to see, we, by speaking to CHO, in the video only, we ask to see. And sometimes, by coming close to the patient in the video itself, the problems he is facing, if someone has a skin problem, then he shows us through the video itself. So those people remain satisfied.
Prime Minister: And later after treating him, does he get satisfaction… what does he feel? Are patients getting well?
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, I get a lot of satisfaction. We also get satisfaction sir. Because I am currently in the health department and simultaneously do tele-consultation… it is a very good, pleasant experience for me to see the patient along with the file.
Prime Minister: On an average, how many patients would be there through Tele Consultation cases?
Dr. Madan Mani: So far I have seen 536 patients.
Prime Minister: Oh… that means you have mastered it a lot.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, it feels good.
Prime Minister: Okay, I wish you all the best. By using this technology, you are doing such a great service to the people living in the remote forests and mountains of Sikkim. And it is a matter of joy that such a good use of technology is being made even in the far-flung areas of our country. Fine… many congratulations to you from my side.
Dr. Madan Mani: Thank You!
Friends, it is clear from the words of Dr. Madan Mani how E-Sanjeevani App is helping them. After Dr. Madan ji, we now join another Madan ji. This is Madan Mohan Lal ji, a resident of Chandauli district of Uttar Pradesh. Now it is also a coincidence that Chandauli is also adjacent to Banaras. Come, let us know from Madan Mohan ji what his experience as a patient regarding E-Sanjeevani has been!
Prime Minister: Madan Mohan ji, Pranam!
Madan Mohan ji: Namaskar, Namaksar Sir!
Prime Minister: Namaskar! Well, I have been told that you are a diabetic patient.
Madan Mohan ji: Yes…yes
Prime Minister: And you take help of technology regarding your illness through teleconsultation!
Madan Mohan ji: Ji..ji
Prime Minister: As a patient, I want to listen to your experiences, so that I would like to convey to our countrymen how the people living in our villages can use today’s technology. Tell me, how do you do it?
Madan Mohan ji: It is like this Sir, hospitals are far away and when I got diabetes, I had to travel 5-6 kms away to get treatment done…to consult on it. And since the arrangement has been made by you, means that I go now, I am examined, it also makes us talk to doctors from outside and also provides us medicines. It is of great benefit to me and other people are also benefited by it.
Prime Minister: So every time is it the same doctor that sees you or the doctors keep changing?
Madan Mohan ji: Since they don’t understand, they show it to the doctor. It talks to us and makes us talk to another doctor.
Prime Minister: And the guidance that doctors give you, you get full benefit from it?
Madan Mohan ji: We are benefited. We have a great benefit through that. And the people of the village also benefit from it. Everyone there asks that brother, we have BP, we have sugar, test, check, tell us about the medicine. And earlier they used to go 5-6 kilometres away… there used to be long queues… there used to be queues in Pathology. There used to be a loss of an entire day’s time.
Prime Minister: Meaning, your time is also saved.
Madan Mohan ji: And money was also wasted and here all services are being done free of cost.
Prime Minister: Well, when you see the doctor in person, in front of you, a trust is formed. Okay…here’s a doctor, he has checked my pulse, my eyes… he has also checked my tongue. So it’s a different feeling. Now if they do Tele Consultation, do you get the same satisfaction?
Madan Mohan ji: Yes, there is satisfaction. I feel that they feel our pulse, check with a stethoscope, and I feel very happy that well…Such a good arrangement has been made by you… We earlier had to go there with difficulty, paying for transport fare…Had to line up in a queue there…Now, we are getting all the facilities sitting at home.
Prime Minister: Well, Madan Mohan ji, I wish you all the best. Even at this stage of age, you have learned technology, you use technology. Tell others too so that their time is saved… money too is saved and through whatever guidance they get, medicines can also be used in a better way.
Madan Mohan ji: Yes, of course!
Prime Minister: Fine, my best wishes to you Madan Mohan ji.
Madan Mohan ji: Sir, you have made Banaras Kashi Vishwanath Station, developed it. Our congratulations to you on that!
Prime Minister: I thank you. What have we made? The people of Banaras have made Banaras. Otherwise, we have been called by Mother Ganga to serve Mother Ganga, that’s all, nothing else. Ok ji, many best wishes to you. Pranam ji
Madan Mohan ji: Namaskar Sir!
Prime Minister: Namaskar ji!
Friends, E-Sanjeevani is becoming a life-saving app for the common man of the country, for the middle class, for the people living in hilly areas. This is the power of India’s digital revolution. And today we are seeing its effect in every field. You also know the power of India’s UPI. Many countries of the world are drawn towards it. Just a few days ago, UPI-Pay Now Link has been launched between India and Singapore. Now, people of Singapore and India are transferring money from their mobile phones in the same way as they do within their respective countries. I am glad that people have started taking advantage of it. Be it India’s E-SanjeevaniApp or UPI, these have proved to be very helpful in raising the Ease of Living.
My dear countrymen, when a species of bird, a living being which is going extinct in a country is saved, it is discussed all over the world. There are many such great traditions in our country which had disappeared, had been removed from the minds and hearts of the people, but now efforts are being made to revive them with the power of public participation, so for discussing that… What better platform than ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
What I am going to tell you now will make you really happy…you will be proud of our heritage. Shriman Kanchan Banerjee, who lives in America, has drawn my attention to one such campaign related to the preservation of heritage. I congratulate him. Friends, this month, ‘Tribeni Kumbho Mohotshav’ was organized in Bansberia of Hooghly district in West Bengal. More than eight lakh devotees participated in it…But do you know why it is so special? It is special, since this practice has been revived after 700 years. Although this tradition is thousands of years old, but unfortunately this festival which used to take place in Tribeni, Bengal was stopped 700 years ago. It should have been started after independence, but that too could not happen. Two years ago, the festival has been started again by the local people and through ‘Tribeni Kumbho Porichalona Shomiti’. I congratulate all the people associated with its organization. You are not only keeping alive a tradition, but are also protecting the cultural heritage of India.
Friends, Tribeni in West Bengal has been known as a holy place for centuries. It finds mention in various Mangalakavya, Vaishnava literature, Shakta literature and other Bangla literary works. Various historical documents suggest that this region was once a centre of Sanskrit, education and Indian culture. Many saints consider it a holy place for Kumbh Snan on Magh Sankranti. In Tribeni, you will find many Ganga Ghats, Shiva temples and ancient buildings decorated with terracotta architecture. Kumbh Mela was organized here last year to restore the cultural heritage of Tribeni and revive the glory of Kumbh tradition. Seven centuries later, the three-day Kumbh Mahasnan and the fair have infused a new energy into the region. A large number of people participated in the Ganga Aarti, Rudrabhishek and Yajna that took place every day for three days. Various ashrams, mutths and akhadas were also included in the festival this time. Various genres related to Bengali traditions such as Kirtan, Baul, Godiyo Nritto, Sree-Khol, Poter Gaan, Chou-Nach, became the center of attraction in the evening programmes. This is a very commendable effort to connect our youth with the golden past of the country. There are many other such practices in India, which need to be revived. I hope that the discussion about them will definitely inspire people in this direction.
My dear countrymen, Swachh Bharat Abhiyan has changed the meaning of public participation in our country. If something related to cleanliness takes place anywhere in the country people certainly inform me about it. That’s how my attention was drawn to a cleanliness campaign by the youth of Haryana. There is a village in Haryana – Dulhedi. The youth here decided that Bhiwani city has to be made exemplary in terms of cleanliness. He formed an organization called Yuva Swachhta Evam Janseva Samiti. The youth associated with this committee reach Bhiwani at 4 in the morning. Together they run cleanliness drives at different places in the city. These people have so far cleared tons of garbage from different areas of the city.
Friends, ‘Waste to Wealth’ is also an important dimension of the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan. Kamala Moharana, a sister from Kendrapada district of Odisha, runs a self-help group. The women of this group make many things like baskets and mobile stands from milk pouches and other plastic packing materials. This is becoming a good source of income for them along with ensuring cleanliness. If we resolve, we can make a huge contribution towards a clean India. At least we all should take a pledge to replace plastic bags with cloth bags. You will see, how much satisfaction your resolution will give you, and also inspire other people.
My dear countrymen, today you and I joined together and once again talked about many inspirational topics. We listened to everything sitting with family and will now hum it throughout the day. The more we talk about the industriousness of the country, the more energy we derive. Moving with this very energy flow, today we have reached the milepost of the 98th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Holi festival is just a few days from today. Happy Holi to all of you. We have to celebrate our festival with the resolve of ‘Vocal for Local’. Don’t forget to share your experiences with me too. Till then, I take leave of you. Next time we will meet again with new topics. Thank you very much, Namaskar!




99. MARCH 26, 2023


My dear Countrymen, once again a very warm welcome to all of you in Mann Ki Baat. As we commence this discussion today, many thoughts are arising in the mind and the heart. This mutual connection through Mann Ki Baat has reached its ninety-ninth (99th) distinction. Generally, we get to hear that the turn around the ninety-ninth (99th) is very difficult. In Cricket, “Nervous Nineties” is considered a very difficult stage. But, where there is Mann Ki Baat of the people of India, the inspiration therein is something else altogether! I’m also happy that there is a lot of enthusiasm among the people of the country regarding the hundredth (100th) episode of Mann Ki Baat. I am receiving a lot of messages; even phone calls. Today, when we are celebrating the Azadi ka Amrit Kaal; moving forward with new resolutions, I’m also very eager to know your suggestions and thoughts regarding the hundredth (100th) episode of Mann Ki Baat. I am eagerly waiting for such suggestions of yours. Although, one always has to wait…this time the wait is just longer. Your suggestions and ideas will make the hundredth (100th) Mann Ki Baat on the 30th of April extremely memorable.
My dear countrymen, in Mann Ki Baat, we have mentioned thousands of people who dedicate their lives in the service of others. There are many people who spend their entire pension towards the education of daughters…some dedicate their whole life’s earnings for the environment and the living beings. In our country, selfless charity, Parmarth has been placed so high that people do not hesitate to donate their all for the happiness of others. That’s why since childhood we are narrated the sagas of Shivi and Dadhichi, who sacrificed their mortal selves.
Friends, in this era of modern medical science, organ donation has become a very important means of imparting life to someone. It is said that when a person donates one’s body after death, it creates a possibility for eight to nine people to get a new life. It is matter of satisfaction, that today awareness about Organ Donation is also rising in the country, In the year 2013, there were less than five thousand cases of organ donation in our country; but in 2022, this number has increased to more than fifteen thousand. People who have done organ donation, their families, have actually accomplished a lot of Punya!
Friends, I cherished a desire for a long time to know the Mann Ki Baat of people who do such noble deeds and share it with the countrymen as well. So today in Mann Ki Baat a lovely daughter, a father of a beautiful angel and her mother are going to join us. The father’s name is Sukhbir Singh Sandhu ji and the mother’s name is Supreet Kaur ji…this family resides in Amritsar, Punjab. After many a prayer, they were blessed with a very beautiful girl child…a doll like daughter. The people of the household lovingly named her Ababat Kaur. The connotation of Ababat is related to the service of others…it is related to ameliorating the sufferings of others. When she was only thirty nine days old, she left this world. But Sukhbir Singh Sandhu ji and his wife Supreet Kaur ji, their family took a very inspiring decision. And the decision was…Organ Donation of a daughter who was thirty nine days only. Sukhbir Singh and his wife are present with us on the phone line at this moment. Come, let’s talk to them.
Prime Minister – Sukhbir ji Namaste.
Sukhbir ji – Namaste Honorable Prime Minister. Sat Shri Akal
Prime Minister – Sat Shri Akal ji, Sat Shri Akal ji, Sukhbir ji, as I was thinking about ‘Mann Ki Baat’ today, I felt that since the matter pertaining to Ababat is so inspiring, I should listen to it straight from you, because when a daughter is born in the household, it brings along many dreams and a lot of joy… but I can also imagine how severe the pain would be if the daughter departs so soon. The way you have taken the decision, I want to know about it in its entirety.
Sukhbir ji – Sir God had given us a very beautiful child, a very lovely doll had arrived into our house. As soon as she was born, we came to know that she has a bunch of nerves in her brain due to which the size of her heart was getting bigger. So we were taken aback that the child was healthy…so beautiful and yet born with such a big problem! So, for the first 24 days the child was completely normal. Suddenly her heart stopped working completely, so we quickly took her to the hospital, where the doctors revived her, but it took time to understand what was wrong with her… such a big problem; a small child and a sudden heart attack. So we took her to PGI Chandigarh for treatment. There the child fought bravely during the treatment. But the disease was such that its treatment was not possible at such a tender age. The doctors tried a lot to revive her, if the child were to approach the six month mark, then one could have thought of operating on her. But God had something else in mind, when she was only 39 days old, the doctor said that she had suffered a heart attack again, now there was very little hope left. So we both husband and wife weepingly came to the decision that we had seen her fighting bravely again and again as if she would go away now but then she was reviving, so we felt that this child had some purpose in coming here. So when they expressed utter helplessness, both of us decided… why not donate the organs of this child. Maybe there would be light in someone else’s life! Then we contacted the administrative block of PGI and they guided us that only kidneys of such a small child can be taken. The almighty gave us the courage, it is the philosophy of Guru Nanak Saheb that guided us in this decision.
Prime Minister – In life,You have truly abided by the teachings given by the Gurus. Are you there Supreet ji? Can we talk to her?
Sukhbir ji – Yes sir.
Supreet ji- Hello.
Prime Minister – Supreet ji I offer my Pranam to you.
Supreet ji- Namaskar sir Namaskar sir, it is a matter of great pride for us that you are talking to us.
Prime Minister – You have done such a great deed and I believe that when the country will get to know of all this, many people will come forward to save someone’s life. This contribution of Ababat, indeed is very big.
Supreet ji- Sir, this too was probably a Bakshish from Guru Nanak Badshah ji that gave us the courage to take such a decision.
Prime Minister – Nothing can happen without the blessings of the Gurus.
Supreet ji – absolutely sir absolutely.
Prime Minister- Sukhbir ji, when you were in the hospital and when the doctor gave you this shocking news, even after that you and your wife took such a big decision with a calm and composed mind, it is the teachings of the Gurus that led to such an altruistic thought in the mind and in fact the meaning of Ababat in common parlance is helpful. I want to hear of the moment that this work was done.
Sukhbir ji- Sir, actually Priya ji, a family friend of ours had donated her organs and we got inspiration from her too…so at that time we felt that the body which is there would merge into the five elements. When someone gets separated forever and goes away, his body is burnt or buried, but if his organs are useful to someone, then it is a good deed and we felt more proud at that time when the doctors told us that your daughter had become the youngest donor in India whose organs had been successfully transplanted. So our heads were held high with pride that whereas we could not bring glory to our parents till this age, a small child had come and raised our name in so many days…and the bigger thing that today I am talking to you about this topic. We are feeling proud.
Prime Minister – Sukhbir ji, it is not as if only one part of your daughter is alive today. Your daughter has become an immortal traveler of the immortal saga of humanity. She is present even today through a part of her body. For this noble deed, I appreciate you, your wife, your family.
Sukhbir ji – Thank you sir
Friends, the greatest feeling behind organ donation is that someone’s life should be saved even while leaving. People who wait for organ donation know how difficult it is to pass each moment of waiting. And in such a situation, when an organ donor or a cadaver donor is found, then virtually, a form of the Almighty is seen in him. Snehlata Chaudhary, a resident of Jharkhand, was also like that who gave life to others as the Almighty would! Snehlata Chowdhary, 63, donated her heart, kidney and liver. Today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, her son Abhijit Chowdhary is with us. Let’s hear from him.
Prime Minister – Abhijeet ji, Namaskar.
Abhijeet ji- Pranam sir.
Prime Minister- Abhijeet ji, you are the son of such a mother who gave you life in a way by giving birth to you, but even after her death, your mother gave life to many people. You Abhijeet must certainly be feeling proud as a son.
Abhijeet ji – Yes sir.
Prime Minister- Tell us a little bit about your mother, under what circumstances the decision of organ donation was taken?
Abhijeet ji – There is a small village in Jharkhand called Seraikela, where both my parents live. They used to go on a morning walk continuously for the last twenty-five years.According to her routine, she left for her morning walk at 4 in the morning. At that time a motorcyclist hit her from behind and she fell instantly due to which she suffered severe head injury. Immediately we took her to Sadar Hospital, Seraikela, where the doctor bandaged her, but she was bleeding profusely. And she had no consciousness. Immediately we took her to Tata main hospital. She underwent surgery there, after 48 hours of observation, the doctor said that there are very few chances from there on. Then we airlifted her and brought her to AIIMS Delhi. She was under treatment here for about 7-8 days. After that the observation was fine, but suddenly her blood pressure dropped a lot, after that, we came to know that she had suffered brain death. Then the doctor briefed us with the protocol about organ donation. We could not tell our father that there is something like organ donation because we felt that he would not be able to absorb that, so, We wanted to remove from his mind that something like that was going on. As soon as we told him that the matter of organ donation was going on. Then he said that no – no, this was the mother’s wish and we had to do this. We were very disappointed till the time we came to know that mummy will not be able to survive, but as soon as this organ donation discussion started, that disappointment turned to a very positive side and we entered a very positive environment. While doing that, we had counselling at 8 o’clock in the night. On the second day we did organ donation. Mummy had lofty thoughts in this matter… earlier she used to be very active in social activities such as eye-donation. Perhaps we were able to do such a big thing with that very thought in mind, and because of my father’s decision making regarding this matter, this thing became possible.
Prime Minister – How many people benefitted through the organs?
Abhijeet ji – Her heart, two kidneys, liver and both eyes were donated, so four people got their lives back and two people their eyes.
Prime Minister- Abhijeet ji, both your father and mother are entitled to a respectful bow. I salute them…your father led your family members in such a big decision, it is really very inspiring. I believe that a mother is afterall a mother. A mother is also an inspiration by herself. But the traditions that the mother leaves behind become a great strength from generation to generation. The inspiration for organ donation is reaching the whole country today through your mother. I congratulate your whole family for this sacred and great work. Thank you Abhijeet ji, and do convey our regards to your father.
Abhijeet ji – definitely, thank you
Friends, whether it is 39-day-old Ababat Kaur or 63-year-old Snehlata Chowdhary, great donors like them make us understand the importance of life. In our country today there are a large number of needy people who are waiting for an organ donor in the hope of a healthy life. It is a matter of utmost satisfaction for me that in order to make organ donation easy and to encourage it, work is being done on a uniform policy in the whole country. In this direction, it has also been decided to remove the condition of domicile of the states, that is, now the patient will be able to go to any state of the country and register for receiving the organs. The government has also decided to abolish the age limit of below 65 years for organ donation. In the midst of these efforts, I urge the countrymen that organ donors should come forward in maximum numbers. One decision of yours can save the lives of many people, can give life.
My dear countrymen, this is the time of Navratri; the time to worship Shakti. Today, the potential of India which is emerging from a new perspective, our woman power has a very big role in it. Recently, many such examples have emerged before us. You must have seen Asia’s first female loco pilot Surekha Yadav on social media. Surekha ji, setting another record, has also become the first woman loco pilot of Vande Bharat Express as well. This month, producer Guneet Monga and director Kartiki Gonsalves brought laurels to the country by winning an Oscar for their documentary, ‘The Elephant Whisperers’. Sister Jyotirmayi Mohanty, Scientist of Bhabha Atomic Research Center has also notched another achievement for the country. Jyotirmoyee has received a special award from IUPAC in the field of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering. Earlier this year, India’s Under-19 women’s cricket team created history by winning the T-20 World Cup. If you look at politics, a new beginning has taken place in Nagaland. In Nagaland, for the first time in 75 years, two women legislators have reached the Vidhan Sabha through their victory. One of them has also been made a minister in the Government of Nagaland, that is, for the first time the people of the state have also got a woman minister.
Friends, A few days ago, I also met those brave daughters who went to help the people of Turkey after the devastating earthquake. All these were part of the NDRF contingent.
Their courage and skills are being praised all over the world. India has also deployed a Women-only Platoon in the Peacekeeping Force under the UN Mission.
Today, the daughters of the country are raising the flag of their bravery in all the three armed forces. Group Captain Shalija Dhami has become the first woman Air Force officer to get a Command Appointment in a Combat Unit. She has a flying experience of about 3000 hours. Similarly, brave heart Captain Shiva Chauhan of the Indian Army has become the first woman officer to be posted at Siachen. Shiva will be stationed for three months in Siachen where the temperature drops to minus sixty (-60) degrees.
Friends, this list is so long that it is difficult to discuss all of them here. All such women, our daughters, are today giving energy to India and India’s dreams. This energy of women power is the oxygen of a developed India.
My dear countrymen, these days there is a lot of talk about clean energy, renewable energy all over the world. When I meet the people across the world, they certainly talk about India’s phenomenal success in this field. Especially, the speed with which India is moving forward in the field of solar energy is a big achievement in itself. The people of India have had a special relationship with the Sun for centuries. The scientific understanding we have about the power of the Sun, the traditions of worshiping the Sun, are rarely seen at other places. I am happy that today every countryperson understands the importance of solar energy and also wants to contribute towards clean energy. This spirit of ‘Sabka Prayas’ is taking India’s Solar Mission forward today. In Pune, Maharashtra, one such excellent effort has caught my attention. Here the people of MSR-Olive Housing Society have decided that they would now run things of common utility like drinking water, lift and lights in the society with solar energy only. After this everyone together in this society got solar panels installed. Today about 90 thousand kilowatt hour electricity is being generated from these solar panels every year. This is resulting in saving of about 40, 000 rupees every month. All the people of the Society are getting the benefit of this savings.
Friends, Like Pune, the people of Diu in Daman-Diu, which is a separate district, have also done a wonderful job. You must know that Diu is near Somnath. Diu has become the first district in India, which is using 100% clean energy for all day time needs. The mantra of this success of Diu is also Sabka Prayas. Once upon a time resources for power generation were a challenge. People chose solar energy as a solution to this challenge. Here solar panels were installed on barren land and many buildings. Through these panels, more electricity is being generated in Diu than what is required during the day time. Through this solar project, about 52 crore rupees have also been saved on the purchase of electricity. Due to this, the environment has also been saved a lot.
Friends, what they have done in Pune and Diu, such efforts are being made in many other places across the country. This shows how sensitive we Indians are about the environment and nature, and how our country is very alert for the future generations. I heartily appreciate all such efforts.
My dear countrymen, in our country, with the passage of time, according to the situation and circumstances, many traditions develop. These traditions increase the strength of our culture and also give it new vitality daily. A few months ago, one such tradition started in Kashi. During the Kashi-Tamil Sangamam, the centuries-old historical and cultural ties between Kashi and the Tamil region were celebrated. The spirit of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’ gives strength to our country. When we know and learn about each other, this feeling of oneness strengthens. With this spirit of unity, ‘Saurashtra-Tamil Sangamam’ will be held in different parts of Gujarat next month. The ‘Saurashtra-Tamil Sangamam’ will run from April 17 to 30. Some listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ must be wondering, what the relation of Saurashtra in Gujarat with Tamil Nadu is? Let me tell you, centuries ago many people from Saurashtra had settled in different parts of Tamil Nadu. These people are still known as ‘Saurashtri Tamil’. Even today, some glimpses of Saurashtra can be found in their food habits, lifestyle and social rituals. Many people from Tamil Nadu have written appreciative letters to me regarding this event. Jayachandran ji, who lives in Madurai, has written something very poignant. He said that – “After a thousand years, for the first time someone has thought about the Saurashtra-Tamil relations, and brought to the fore the people who settled in Tamil Nadu from Saurashtra.” Jayachandran’s words are the expression of thousands of Tamil brothers and sisters.
Friends, I would like to inform the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ about a piece of news related to Assam. This too strengthens the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’. You all know that we are celebrating the 400th birth anniversary of Veer Lachit Borphukan ji. The brave Lachit Borphukan had liberated Guwahati from the clutches of the tyrannical Mughal Sultanate. Today, the country is getting acquainted with the indomitable courage of this great warrior. A few days ago, a campaign for essay writing based on the life of Lachit Borphukan was launched. You will be surprised to know that about 45 lakh people sent essays for this. You will also be happy to know that now it has become a Guinness Record. And the biggest thing and a matter of great happiness is that these essays that have been written and sent by the people on Veer Lachit Borphukan have been written in about 23 different languages. Among them, apart from the Assamese language, people have sent essays in languages like Hindi, English, Bangla, Bodo, Nepali, Sanskrit, and Santhali. I express my heartfelt appreciation to everyone who has been a part of this effort.
My dear countrymen, when it comes to Kashmir or Srinagar, the first picture that comes to our mind is of her valleys and Dal Lake. All of us would like to enjoy the views of Dal Lake…However, there is one more thing special about Dal Lake. Dal Lake is also known for its delicious Lotus Stems, also known as ‘Kamal Kakdi’. Lotus stems are known by different names in different places across the country. In Kashmir, they are called Nadru. The demand for Nadru of Kashmir is continuously increasing. In light of this demand, farmers cultivating Nadru in Dal Lake have formed an FPO. About 250 farmers have joined this FPO. Today these farmers have started exporting their Nadru to foreign countries. Just some time back, these farmers sent two consignments to UAE. This success is not only bringing a name to Kashmir but also it has increased the income of hundreds of farmers.
Friends, another such effort of the people of Kashmir related to agriculture is diffusing the fragrance of its success these days. You must be wondering why I am talking about the fragrance of success – Well…it is a matter of fragrance and it is a matter of aroma! There is a town ‘Bhadarwah’ in the Doda district of Jammu and Kashmir. Here, the farmers had been engaged in traditional maize cultivation for decades, but some farmers thought of doing something different. They turned to floriculture, that is, the cultivation of flowers. Today, around two and a half thousand farmers are cultivating lavender here. They have also been handheld through the Aroma Mission of the Central Government. This new cultivation has greatly increased the income of the farmers, and today, along with the lavender, the fragrance of their success is spreading far and wide.
Friends, when there is talk of Kashmir, talk of lotus, talk of flowers, talk of fragrance, then it is very natural to remember Maa Sharda who is seated on the lotus flower. A few days ago, the Grand Temple of Maa Sharda was inaugurated in Kupwara. This temple is built on the same route one would use to go to visit Sharda Peeth. The local people have helped a lot in the construction of this Temple. I congratulate the people of Jammu and Kashmir for this auspicious work.
My dear countrymen, that’s all for this edition of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I will meet you next time in the hundredth episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I urge you all to send your suggestions. In this month of March, from Holi to Navratri, we have been busy with many festivals. The holy month of Ramzan has also started. The auspicious festival of Shri Ram Navami is also going to be celebrated in the next few days. After this… Mahavir Jayanti, Good Friday and Easter will also be observed. In the month of April, we also celebrate the birth anniversaries of two great personalities of India. These are two great men – Mahatma Jyotiba Phule, and Babasaheb Ambedkar. Both these great men made unprecedented contributions to eradicate discrimination from society. Today, in ‘Azadi ka AmritKaal’, we need to learn from such great personalities and take constant inspiration from them. We have to keep our duties at the forefront. Friends, at this time, cases of Corona are also rising in some places. That’s why, all of you must take precautions and be mindful of cleanliness. We will meet again next month in the 100th episode of Mann Ki Baat. Till then, I take leave of you.
Thank you, Namaskar!
100.30TH APRIL 2023
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today is the hundredth episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I have received thousands of letters from all of you, lakhs of messages … and I have tried to read as many letters as possible, have a look at them and try to understand the messages a bit. Many a time while reading your letters, I got emotional, was filled with emotions, got carried away in emotions and then also composed myself. You have congratulated me on the 100th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, but I say this from the core of my heart,…that in fact, all of you, the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, our countrymen, deserve congratulations. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is the ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of crores of Indians, it is the expression of their feelings.
Friends, the 3rd of October, 2014 was the festival of Vijaya Dashami and all of us together started the journey of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ on the day of Vijaya Dashami. Vijaya Dashami is the festival of victory of good over evil. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has also become a unique festival of goodness and positivity of the countrymen. A festival that comes every month, keenly awaited by all of us. We celebrate positivity in this. We also celebrate people’s participation in this. Sometimes it is hard to believe that so many months, so many years have passed since ‘Mann Ki Baat’ commenced. Every episode was special in itself. Every time, the novelty of new examples, every time the extension of new successes of the countrymen. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, people from every corner of the country, people of all age groups joined. Whether it is about Beti Bachao Beti Padhao, or the Swachh Bharat movement, love for Khadi or nature, whether it is the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav or Amrit Sarovar, any subject with which ‘Mann Ki Baat’ got associated, turned into a mass movement, and you people have made it so. When I jointly shared ‘Mann Ki Baat’ with the then US President Barack Obama, it was discussed all over the world.
Friends, for me, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has been like worshipping the qualities in others. I had a guide – Shri Laxmanrao ji Inamdar. We used to address him as Vakeel Saheb. He always used to say that we should worship the qualities of others. No matter who is face to face with you, be it your compatriot, be it your opponent, we should try to know about their good qualities and learn from them. This trait of his has always inspired me. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has become a great medium to learn from the qualities of others.
My dear countrymen, this program has never let me be away from you. I remember, when I was the Chief Minister of Gujarat, it was natural to meet and interact with the common people there. The work and tenure of the Chief Minister is like that…, there are many opportunities to come together. But after coming to Delhi in 2014, I found that life here was very different. The nature of the work is different, the responsibility is different, one is bound by circumstances, the rigours of security & time limits. In the initial days, something felt different, there was an emptiness. Fifty years ago, I did not leave my home just to find one day it would be difficult to contact the people of my own country. The very countrymen who are my everything,… I could not live separated from them. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ gave me a solution to this challenge, a way to connect with the common man. The post and protocol remained limited to the system and public sentiment, along with crores of people, became an inseparable part of my inner world. Every month I read thousands of messages from the people of the country, every month I get to view one or the other wonderful manifestation of the countrymen. I see and feel the extremities of the penance and sacrifice of the countrymen. I just don’t feel that I am even a little far from you. For me ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is not a program, for me it is a matter of faith, of worship, or Vrat. Like when people go to worship God, they bring along a Thaal of Prasad. For me, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is like a Thaal of Prasad at the feet of God in the form of Janata-Janardan, the people. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has become a spiritual journey of my being.
‘Mann Ki Baat’ is a journey from the self to the collective.
‘Mann Ki Baat’ is a journey from myself to ourselves.
It is not me, but you are its Sanskar Sadhana.
Imagine, some of our countrymen have been planting trees on deserted hills and barren land for 40 odd years, many people have been digging stepwells and ponds for water conservation for 30 odd years, cleaning them as well. Some have been teaching underprivileged children for 25-30 years, some are helping in the treatment of the poor. I have become emotional while mentioning them many a time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Friends from AIR had to re-record it many times. Today, a lot from the past is coming in front of my eyes. These efforts of the countrymen have inspired me to continuously keep striving.
Friends, the people who we mention in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ are all our Heroes who have made this program come alive. Today, when we have reached the milestone of the 100th episode, I also wish that we once again go to all these Heroes to know about their journey. Today, we will also try to talk to some colleagues. Brother Sunil Jaglan of Haryana is joining me. Sunil Jaglan ji has had such an impact on my mind because there used to be a lot of discussion on Gender Ratio in Haryana and I also started the campaign of ‘Beti Bachao-Beti Padhao’ from Haryana itself. And meanwhile, when I came across Sunil ji’s ‘Selfie With Daughter’ campaign, I felt very happy. I also learned from him and included it in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. In no time ‘Selfie With Daughter’ turned into a Global Campaign. And the issue in this was neither selfie, nor technology,… importance was accorded to the daughter. The importance of a daughter in life also comes to the fore through this campaign. The result of many such efforts is that today the Gender Ratio has improved in Haryana. Let’s chat with Sunil ji today.
Mr. Prime Minister – Namaskar Sunil ji,
Sunil- Namaskar sir, my joy has risen a lot after hearing your voice sir.
Prime Minister- Sunil ji everyone remembers ‘Selfie with daughter’… Now when it is being discussed once again, how do you feel?
Sunil – Prime Minister, in fact, the fourth battle of Panipat that you started from our state Haryana to bring smiles on the faces of the daughters, which the whole country has tried to win under your leadership, is really important for me, for every daughter’s father and those who love daughters.
Prime Minister- Sunil ji, how is your daughter now, what is she doing these days?
Sunil- Yes, my daughters are Nandani and Yachika, one is studying in class 7, one is studying in class 4 and they are big fans of yours. Actually they and their classmates have written letters to you saying Thank you Prime Minister.
Prime Minister – That’s great! Give lots of blessings to the daughters on my behalf and that of listeners of Mann Ki Baat.
Sunil- Thank you very much. Because of you, smiles on the faces of the daughters of the country are continuously on the rise.
Prime Minister – Thank you very much Sunil ji.
Sunil – Ji. Thank you.
It’s a matter of fulfilment for me that in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we have mentioned hundreds of inspiring stories of woman power of the country. Be it our army or the sports world, whenever I have talked about the achievements of women, it has been praised a lot. Like we discussed about the women of Deur village of Chhattisgarh. These women, through self-help groups, run campaigns to clean village squares, roads and temples. Similarly, the country also took a lot of inspiration from the tribal women of Tamil Nadu, who exported thousands of Eco-Friendly Terracotta Cups. In Tamil Nadu itself, 20 thousand women came together to revive the Nag river in Vellore. Many such campaigns have been led by our woman power and ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has served as a platform to bring their efforts to the fore.
Friends, we now have one more gentleman on the phone line. His name is Manzoor Ahmed. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, Manzoor Ahmed ji was referred to while talking about Pencil Slates of Jammu and Kashmir.
Prime Minister – Manzoor ji, how are you?
Manzoor ji – Thank you sir… doing very well sir.
Prime Minister- It is a great pleasure to talk to you in this 100th episode of Mann Ki Baat.
Manzoor ji – Thank you sir.
Prime Minister- Well, how is the pencil-slates work going on?
Manzoor ji – It is going very well sir. Ever since you mentioned our Man Ki Baat in Mann ki Baat programme, sir, work has increased a lot since then sir and employment for others has also increased a lot in this work.
Prime Minister- How many people would be getting employment now?
Manzoor ji – Now I have 200 plus…
Prime Minister – Great! I am very happy.
Manzoor ji – Ji sir..ji sir…now I am expanding it in a couple of months and employment for 200 people will increase sir.
Prime Minister – Well great! See Manzoor ji…
Manjoor ji – Yes sir…
Prime Minister- I remember very well and on that day you told me that this is such a work which has no identity, there is no self-recognition, and you underwent a lot of distress and because of this you had to face a lot of difficulties. But now there is recognition and you are giving employment to more than 200 people.
Manjoor ji – Yes sir…
Prime Minister- And you have given us delightful news of carrying out new expansions and giving employment to further 200 people.
Manzoor ji- Even sir, the farmers who are here, sir, also got a lot of benefit from this, sir. Used to sell a tree for 2000, now the same tree has reached 5000 sir. Demand has increased a lot in this since then… and it has also gained its own identity. Sir, I have many orders for this, now I am going to expand further in one or two months and cover two to four villages, taking 200 to 250 boys and girls who can be adjusted in this and they can carry on with their livelihood sir.
Prime Minister- See Manzoor ji, how tremendous the power of Vocal for Local is.., you have manifested it on the ground.
Manjoor ji – Yes sir.
Prime Minister- Many many good wishes to you and all the farmers of the village and also to all the colleagues working with you, thank you brother.
Manzoor ji – Thank you sir.
Friends, there are so many talented people in our country who have reached the pinnacle of success through their hard work. I remember, Venkat Murali Prasad ji of Visakhapatnam did an Atmanirbhar Bharat Chart Share. He had told us how he would make maximum use of Indian products only. When Pramod ji of Bettiah set up a small unit to make LED bulbs or Santosh ji of Garhmukteshwar started making mats, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ became the medium to bring their products in front of everyone. We have discussed many examples from Make in India to Space Start-ups in ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Friends, you may remember that a few episodes ago I had also mentioned about Manipur’s sister Vijayashanti Devi. Vijayashanti ji makes clothes from lotus fibers. This unique eco-friendly idea of her was discussed in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ and her work became more popular. Today Vijayashanti ji is with us on the phone.
Prime Minister :- Namaste Vijayashanti ji! How are you?
Vijayashanti ji :- Sir, I am fine.
Prime Minister :- and how’s your work going on?
Vijayashanti ji :- sir, still working along with my 30 women
Prime Minister :- in such a short period you have reached 30 persons team!
Vijayashanti ji :- Yes sir, this year also more expand with 100 women in my area
Prime Minister :- So your target is 100 women
Vijayashanti ji :- Yaa! 100 women
Prime Minister :- and now people are familiar with this lotus stem fiber
Vijayashanti ji :- yes sir, everyone’s know from ‘Mann Ki Baat’ Program all over India.
Prime Minister :- so now its very popular
Vijayashanti ji :- yes sir, from Prime Minister ‘Mann ki Baat’ program everyone knows about lotus fiber
Prime Minister :- So now you got the market also?
Vijayashanti ji :- Yes, I have got a market from USA also they want to buy in bulk in lots quantities, but I want to give from this year to send the U.S also.
Prime Minister :- So, now you are an exporter?
Vijayashanti ji :- yes sir, from this year I export our product made in India Lotus fiber
Prime Minister :- so, when I say Vocal for Local and now Local for Global
Vijayashanti ji :- yes sir, I want to reach my product all over the globe of all world
Prime Minister :- so congratulations and wish you best luck
Vijayashanti ji :- Thank you sir
Prime Minister :- Thank you, Thank you Vijayashanti
Vijayashanti ji :- Thank you sir
Friends, there has been another specialty of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Through ‘Mann Ki Baat’, many mass movements have come into being and gained momentum. For example, the very mission to re-establish our toys and our toy industry started with ‘Mann Ki Baat’. The beginning of raising awareness about Indian breed dogs, our native dogs, was also started with ‘Mann Ki Baat’ only. We had started another campaign that we will not bargain with the poor small scale shopkeepers,… we will not haggle with them. Even when the ‘Har Ghar Tiranga’ campaign started, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ played a big role in connecting the countrymen with this resolve. Every such example has become an agent of change in the society. Pradeep Sangwan ji too has taken up such a task to inspire the society. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we discussed Pradeep Sangwan ji’s ‘Healing Himalayas’ campaign. He is with us on the phone line.
Modi ji – Pradeep ji Namaskar!
Pradeep ji – Sir Jai Hind!
Modi ji – Jai Hind, Jai Hind, brother! How are you?
Pradeep ji – Very nice sir. Even better on hearing your voice.
Modi ji – You thought of healing the Himalayas.
Pradeep ji – Yes sir.
Modi ji – Also launched a campaign. How is your campaign going on these days?
Pradeep ji – Sir it is going on very well. From 2020, imagine that the amount work we used to do in five years is now done in one year.
Modi ji – That’s great!
Pradeep ji – Yes, yes, sir. In the beginning, I was very nervous, I was very scared that whether I would be able to do this for the rest of my life or not, but got some support and till 2020, we were struggling a lot honestly. Not many people were joining …, there were many people who were not able to support. They were not even paying that much attention to our campaign. But after 2020, when it was mentioned in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, many things changed. Meaning, earlier we used to do 6-7 cleaning drives in a year, or 10 cleaning drives. Today, we collect five tons of garbage on a daily basis from different locations.
Modi ji – Wonderful!
Pradeep ji – After being mentioned in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, believe me Sir, that I was at the stage of almost giving up at that point of time and after that a lot of change came in my life and then speeded up so fast which was beyond our comprehension. So I’m really thankful how you find out people like us. Who works in such a remote area, we are working sitting in the Himalayan region. We are working at this altitude. You found us there. You brought our work in front of the world. So it was a very emotional moment for me even then and even today that I am able to talk to the Principal Servant of our country. Nothing can be more fortunate for me than this.
Modi ji – Pradeep ji! You are doing sadhna in true sense on the peaks of the Himalayas and I am sure now on hearing your name, people remember how you are involved in the cleanliness campaign of the mountains.
Pradeep ji – Yes sir.
Modi ji – And as you told us now a huge team is being formed and you are doing such a huge amount of work daily.
Pradeep ji – Yes sir.
Modi ji – And I have full faith that through your efforts and discussion about it, now many mountaineers have started posting photos related to cleanliness.
Pradeep ji – Yes sir! A lot.
Modi ji – It is good. Through the efforts of friends like you, waste is also a wealth is now becoming stable in the minds of the people, and the environment is also being protected now and the Himalayas which we are proud of, are being taken care of and conserved… the common man is also connecting. Pradeep ji I liked it very much. Thank you very much brother.
Pradeep ji – Thank you Sir Thank you so much Jai Hind
Friends, Today tourism is growing very fast in the country. Be it our natural resources, be it rivers, mountains, ponds or our pilgrimage sites, it is very important to keep them clean. This will help the tourism industry a lot. Along with cleanliness in tourism, we have also discussed the Incredible India movement often. Through this movement, for the first time, people came to know about such places, which were just in their neighbourhood. I always say that before going abroad for tourism, we must visit at least 15 tourist destinations of our country and these destinations should not be from the state where you reside…they must be from any other state outside your state. Similarly, we have continuously talked about serious topics like clean Siachen, single use plastic and e-waste. Today, this effort of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is very important in solving environmental issues about which the whole world is concerned.
Friends, this time I have received another special message from UNESCO DG Audrey Azoulay regarding ‘Mann Ki Baat’. She has given best wishes to all the countrymen for this wonderful journey of 100 episodes. Also, she has asked some questions too. Let us first listen to the Mann Ki Baat of the DG of UNESCO.
#Audio (UNESCO DG)#
DG UNESCO: Namaste Excellency, Dear Prime Minister on behalf of UNESCO I thank you for this opportunity to be part of the 100th episode of the ‘Mann Ki Baat’ Radio broadcast. UNESCO and India have a long common history. We have very strong partnerships together in all areas of our mandate – education, science, culture and information and I would like to take this opportunity today to talk about the importance of education. UNESCO is working with its member states to ensure that everyone in the world has access to quality education by 2030. With the largest population in the world, could you please explain Indian way to achieving this objective. UNESCO also works to support culture and protect heritage and India is chairing the G-20 this year. World leaders would be coming to Delhi for this event. Excellency, how does India want to put culture and education at the top of the international agenda? I once again thank you for this opportunity and convey my very best wishes through you to the people of India….see you soon. Thank you very much.
Thank you Excellency. I am happy to interact with you in the 100th ‘Mann Ki Baat’ programme. I am also happy that you have raised the important issues of education and culture.
Friends, The DG of UNESCO has wanted to know about India’s efforts regarding Education and Cultural Preservation. Both these topics have been favorite topics of ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Whether it is about education or culture, whether it is about its preservation or promotion, this has been an ancient tradition of India. The work that the country is doing in this direction today is really commendable. Be it the National Education Policy or the option of studying in a regional language, or technology integration in education, you will notice many such efforts. Years ago, programs like ‘Gunotsav and Shala Praveshotsav’ had become a wonderful example of public participation in Gujarat to providing better education and reducing dropout rates. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we have highlighted the efforts of many such people, who are selflessly working for education. You may remember, once we discussed about Late D. Prakash Rao, a tea vendor in Odisha who was engaged in the mission of teaching poor children. Be it Sanjay Kashyap, who runs Digital Libraries in the villages of Jharkhand, Hemlata N.K., who helped many children through e-learning during Covid. Yes, we have referred to examples of many such teachers in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. We have also accorded regular place to the efforts of Cultural Preservation in ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Be it Lakshdweep’s Kummel Brothers Challengers Club, or platforms such as Karnataka’s ‘Kwemshree’ ji’s ‘Kala Chetna’, people from every corner of the country have sent me such examples through letters. We had also talked about the three competitions which were related to songs, lullabies and ‘Rangoli’ on patriotism. You must remember, once we had discussed Indian forms of education through Story Telling with Story Tellers from across the country. I have an unwavering belief that the biggest change can be brought about by collective effort. This year, where we are moving forward in the Azadi Ka Amritkaal, we are also presiding over the G-20. This is also one of the reasons why our resolve to enrich Diverse Global Cultures along with education has become stronger.
My dear countrymen, a mantra from our Upanishads has been inspiring our collective thought for centuries.
Charaiveti Charaiveti Charaiveti |
Keep moving – keep moving – keep moving
Today we are completing the 100th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ with the same spirit of Charaiveti Charaiveti. In strengthening the social fabric of India, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is like the thread of a rosary, holding each bead together. In every episode, the spirit of service and capability of the countrymen have inspired others. In this program, every countryman becomes an inspiration to other countrymen. In a way, every episode of Mann Ki Baat prepares the ground for the next episode. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has always moved ahead with goodwill, the spirit of service-spirit and the sense of duty. This positivity will take the country forward in the Azadi Ka Amritkaal…, will take her to a new heights and I am happy that the beginning made by ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is becoming a new tradition in the country today. A tradition in which we see the spirit of everyone’s effort.
Friends, today I would also like to thank the personnel of All India Radio who record this entire program with great patience. I am also thankful to the translators, who translate ‘Mann Ki Baat’ into different regional languages really fast in a very short time. I also thank the personnel of Doordarshan and MyGov. I express my gratitude to all the TV channels, people from electronic media across the country, who show ‘Mann Ki Baat’ without commercial breaks and lastly, I would also like to express my gratitude to those who don the mantle of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ – the people of India, people who have faith in India. All this has been possible only because of your inspiration and strength.
Friends, by the way, I have so much to say today that both time and words are falling short. But I am sure that you all will understand my expressions, understand my feelings. As a member of your family, I have been in your midst with the help of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, will remain in your midst. We will meet again next month. We will again celebrate the successes of the countrymen with new topics and new information, till then I take leave of you. Take good care of yourself and your loved ones.
Thank you very much, Namaskar!